Your EuropE, 
Your FrEEdom: 
Delivering change for you

From crisis resolution to delivering 
positive change for our common future

In the last few years, we have been rudely awakened. The pandemic, Russia’s atrocious war against 
Ukraine and the cost-of-living crisis it triggered have put all of us to the test. It has been a stark 
reminder that we cannot and should not take our democracies, peace, and economic opportunities 
for granted.

Despite social and economic hardship, you, the European citizens have shown impressive resilience 
and solidarity. Equally, the European Union has demonstrated that it can and does deliver on what 
really matters, when it really matters. We have come together on core issues previously thought 
impossible. During the war against Ukraine, we stand united against attacks on democratic values, 
and we are seeing individuals from across Europe volunteering to fight in the Armed Forces of 
Ukraine against Russian aggression, supporting and helping our democratic neighbours. During 
the energy crisis, we stood united to find solutions to support you with the increasing cost of living.  
During the pandemic, pooling and sharing medical equipment and resources, jointly investing in 
the development of and purchase of vaccines. It has not always been easy, and there have been 
bumps along the way. But we have accomplished what was unimaginable five years ago.

It  is  time  to  build  on  this.  As  Europe’s  centrist  force  of  liberal  and  democratic  parties,  we  share 
the desire and impatience for better, easier times. By moving forward together, we can and will 
overcome  ongoing  threats  to  our  internal  and  external  security,  economic  challenges,  and  the 
climate  crisis.  Europe  needs  to  become  less  complicated,  and  this  includes  strengthening  the 
principle of subsidiarity. We should not associate the EU with over-regulation or bans, but with 
simple, quick and comprehensible solutions to the challenges of our time. We will fight to make 
Europe a safe and prosperous place to live. Uncertainty comes with change, but in every change, 
there is opportunity. We are committed to find a way through science to make sure these changes 
create  jobs,  maintain  our  welfare  model,  and  uphold  our  world   class  schools,  daycares,  and 
hospitals, and bring open strategic autonomy to key sectors. Our aspiration is that you and future 
generations have the freedom to choose your own life path.

That is why, as the liberal force in Europe, we want to focus on: 

Keep Europe free, safe and democratic: Help Ukraine win the war, enhance our defence 
capabilities and economic security for Europe’s increased independence.

Boost economic growth for your freedom:  lnvest in your skills, and digital and sustainable 
technologies to create jobs, reduce our dependencies and decouple growth from the use of 
natural resources, rising negative climate and health impacts.

Earn  your  trust  through  action  and  reform:  Give  you  a  say  in  how  your  country  and 
Europe are run and create efficient and transparent institutions, holding accountable those 
that breach the law.

ALDE Party Manifesto
1

KEEp EuropE FrEE, 
saFE and 
dEmocratic 

Keep Europe free, 
safe and democratic 

It is time for us to take action and deliver on our promises to maintain freedom, 
openness and democracy. Europe must stand on its own feet and act in our own 
right to guarantee your security and safety, but we must continue collaborating 
with democratic allies while reducing dependence on single suppliers, especially 
from authoritarian regimes.

We have witnessed how the war against Ukraine has brought us together as 
a united continent, demonstrating our commitment to defending democracy 
and security in a positive and responsive manner. It is vital that we reaffirm our 
long-term commitment to Ukraine in its quest for stability and progress.

ALDE Party Manifesto
3

ALDE Party fights for: Make Europe 
a safe place to live

•  While maintaining a balance and avoiding overlap between EU defence cooperation 
and NATO, all European countries must invest in pan-European defence capability. It is 
vital to invest in advanced cooperation in the European Defence Union across land, sea, 
air, and space as well as research and development to improve the European capacity to 
act independently, boosting European production capacity and creating the conditions 
to enable synergies between our countries’ militaries, without duplicating or replacing 
NATO-structures and while acknowledging that NATO remains the primary structure for 
military cooperation.

• 

• 

Base  and  focus  a  new,  revised  and  enhanced  EU  defence  policy  on  the  speedy  and 
effective development of the EU’s own military industrial and production capabilities, 
with Ukraine being an active participant, contributor and partner in the upcoming large-
scale investment programmes in the relevant sectors. Establish a European Commissioner 
for Defence, to ensure a unified approach to EU security and defence policy.

Set  a  clear  mission  to  build  a  European  Defence  Union  in  close  cooperation  with 
European and NATO partners by 2040, allowing Europe to defend its territory, provide 
collective  security  to  its  citizens,  and  to  counter  fragmentation  and  give  an  impulse 
to  standardisation  between  our  armed  forces  to  boost  safety  and  cooperation.  The 
European Defence Union will use its considerable means - the triple D of diplomacy, 
development and defence - to defend European values. It will be prepared to deploy 
military capacity efficiently and quickly.

•  Develop  autonomous  European  strategic  military  capacity  and  make  it  permanently 
available. Augment the EU pillar within NATO by strengthening our Permanent Structured 
Cooperation mechanism to create a high level of efficiency, recognising some member 
states  maintain  neutrality  while  actively  participating  in  peacekeeping  missions  and 
pursuing a values-based foreign policy.

• 

• 

• 

• 

Bolster our European defence industry to strengthen our open strategic autonomy.

Strengthen the EU’s role on the global stage by acting as one: shift to qualified majority 
voting in foreign affairs, defence and security policy, preventing individual countries from 
obstructing our joint ability to act, enhance the roles of the High Representative and the 
European External Action Service, and give the EU a seat in the UN Security Council. 

lntroduce  a  military  area  of  free  movement  to  guarantee  your  security  and  be  able 
to  move  our  military  personnel  and  weaponry  quicker  within  Europe.  Come  up  with 
a  concrete  defence  investment  plan  worth  of  €100bn,  which  will  be  used  to  bolster 
Europe’s defence industry.

Establish foundational rules governing states’ use of digital technologies in warfare and 
boost EU joint capacity to act and respond to evolving digital threats and disinformation, 
including through public -private partnerships and rapid information exchange between 
countries  to  safeguard  our  collective  digital  infrastructure,  ensuring  a  resilient  cyber 
landscape, and keep investing and prioritising digital technologies so the EU will not fall 
behind.

ALDE Party Manifesto
4

 
• 

• 

In our strategic geopolitical stance, we stand in unity with Ukraine, pledging increased 
military assistance until Ukraine’s victory, and post-war reconstruction support, including 
identifying a legal mechanism to utilise frozen Russian assets and ensure accountability. 
We will create a European Union Special Representative for Ukrainian Military assistance 
and  Reconstruction.  We  support  Ukraine’s  full  membership  of  NATO  and  the  EU  to 
increase both Ukraine’s and Europe’s security, with all the security guarantees it entails.

Implement Magnitsky-style targeted sanctions on Chinese officials and other members 
of  the  Chinese  Communist  Party  who  violate  human  rights  in  Xinjiang,  Tibet  and 
Hong Kong under the National Security Law and protect any resident in Europe from 
extradition to China.

•  Oppose any attempts by China to challenge Taiwan’s right to determine its own future, 
or to unilaterally change the status quo in the Taiwan straits, especially through the use 
of force.

• 

• 

Step up the fight against foreign interference in all democratic processes in the European 
Union, including disinformation, as well as political instrumentalisation by third countries.

Tackle the rise in drug-related crime in Europe, which has become a prime market for 
international  drug  traffickers.  lncrease  collaboration  between  Europol,  Interpol  and 
national law enforcement agencies through enhanced information and data exchange 
for all serious cross-border and organised crime. Strengthen Europol’s right to initiate 
new  investigations  and  execute  law  enforcement  activities  in  and  with  the  Member 
States and to proactively engage in and handle cases on its own.

Without  peace  there  is  no  prosperity.  Europe’s  security  needs  a  serious  makeover.  The  shockwave  from  Russia’s 
war against Ukraine, the unrelenting menace of terrorism, and the growing security concerns because of China’s 
policies have shown us that our current systems simply are not cutting it anymore. We must strengthen Europe’s 
autonomous  capabilities  and  maintain  an  open  and  collaborative  approach  with  like-minded  countries  to 
strengthen  our  global  influence  and  address  main  challenges.  We  firmly  oppose  governments  suppressing 
minorities and violating human rights and commit to safeguarding our own economic and strategic interests and 
a sustainable and equitable world order.

ALDE Party Manifesto
5

ALDE Party fights for: Enlargement as a tool 
for reform and security

• 

• 

• 

Reaffirm  our  commitment  to  an  open-door  policy  for  European  countries  that 
fulfil the Copenhagen criteria and make sure that the EU sends strong signals that 
compliance of the criteria and benchmark achievements brings tangible results. 
In that sense, our ambition is to ensure that the countries of the Western Balkans, 
Moldova,  Georgia,  and  Ukraine  are  ready  to  meet  all  accession  criteria  by  2029. 
Besides  meeting  the  Copenhagen  criteria,  EU  candidate  countries  should  align 
themselves with the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP). The EU will 
seek  close  cooperation  on  foreign  affairs  and  security  policies  with  like-minded 
European countries outside of the EU, like the UK and Norway.

lnvite candidate countries to participate in the next EU elections by offering them 
observer non-voting status in the European Parliament and other EU institutions 
until their full membership, as done previously.

Build on the Windsor Framework Agreement to enable the EU to develop a closer 
relationship with the United Kingdom.

•  Welcome  the  European  Political  Community  as  a  forum  to  bring  European 

countries to the table, though not an alternative to EU membership.

• 

• 

• 

lnvest in core public infrastructure and connectivity, with a special emphasis on 
improving electrical and transportation systems. Guarantee equal opportunities for 
educational institutions in all candidate countries, comparable to those associated 
with the Erasmus+ Programme, and support initiatives in candidate countries and 
prospective candidates, such as the concept of “Roam like at Home” between the 
EU and Western Balkans.

Provide  capacity  building  to  support  candidate  countries  to  meet  accession 
criteria, for instance by helping professionalise public administration and develop 
governance.

Prepare the EU for further enlargement. Reform the EU decision-making procedure 
to  ensure  efficiency  also  with  a  larger  number  of  Member  States  and  diverging 
views.  Reform  the  EU  budget  so  it  is  ready  to  absorb  financial  consequences  of 
enlargement.

EU accession benefits us from the political, economic, and security perspectives. The EU, its values and standards 
remain the great unifying factor for all the people of the Western Balkans, Moldova, Georgia, and Ukraine. It is 
crucial to support the development of our sister countries to work their way to candidate status and stabilise the 
region, push for integration and counter disruptive efforts from Russia, China, and other disruptive countries.

ALDE Party Manifesto
6

ALDE Party fights for: Enhance Europe’s 
economic security

• 

Revive the push for EU trade and investment agreements with open, market-based 
economies such as the US, Australia, Mercosur, selected African partners and the 
lndo-Pacific  region  based  on  international  commitments  to  rule  of  law,  human 
rights,  biodiversity  and  climate,  reciprocity  in  market  access  and  adherence  to 
existing WTO rules. The EU must conclude ongoing negotiations, start new talks 
with  other  partners  and  speed  up  the  ratification  of  all  trade  agreements  and 
investment  protection  agreements  that  have  already  been  concluded,  with  the 
exception of the investment agreement with China.

•  Achieve a trans-Atlantic free trade agreement with the US as the best way to fulfil 
our  shared  climate  objective  and  create  jobs  and  growth  opportunities,  while 
reducing the negative consequences of the US Inflation Reduction Act on the EU.

• 

Reduce  dependency  on  regimes  that  do  not  share  our  European  values  using 
a  de-risking  and  diversification  principle.  The  Comprehensive  Agreement  on 
Investment (CAI) agreed with China can only be revisited once Chinese counter-
sanctions  on  European  elected  officials  and  scholars  are  completely  removed, 
and when the agreement provides real commitments and results from China on 
human  rights,  democracy,  labour,  environment,  market  access  and  intellectual 
property protections for European companies.

•  Deliver a bilateral investment agreement between the EU and Taiwan to enhance 

our open strategic autonomy for our high tech and sustainable industries.

• 

• 

• 

Revitalise our trade and political relations with Africa to enhance Europe’s economic 
integration with key African countries in line with their economic strengths and 
interests,  reflecting  an  equal  partnership,  countering  Chinese  investment  and 
influence.

Take the lead on World Trade Organization (WTO) reforms to restore the appellate 
body  as  soon  as  possible  and  achieve  new  commitments  on  technological 
know-how and trade secrets, subsidies and competition, as well as contractually 
enforceable, strong social, environmental and human rights standards.

Explore joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership and establishing an economic security 
council of like-minded countries.

The cost-of-living crisis, the pandemic and global lockdowns and conflicts have shown that we rely too much on 
countries that do not share our values. This puts our democracy, economy, and way of life in danger. However, 
free  trade  remains  key  to  bring  you  growth  and  jobs.  It  is  only  by  strengthening  trade  that  we  can  strengthen 
our economy and ability to act independently, working in your and the EU’s best interest while setting standards 
worldwide. Not to close the EU off to the world but work even more closely with the United States and partners who 
share our values, economic model, and environmental and climate objectives.

ALDE Party Manifesto
7

Boost Economic 
growth For 
Your FrEEdom

Boost economic 
growth for your 
freedom

Our  economic  freedom,  today’s  and  tomorrow’s  jobs  and  our  ability  to 
tackle  climate  change  depend  on  the  successful  shift  to  a  sustainable  and 
digital  economy  that  empowers  you. We  can  turn  these  major  changes  into 
opportunities if we clearly and strictly prioritise and target EU money.

This  is  not  just  a  question  of  spending  levels,  but  how  we  spend  it.  The  EU 
already has a €1.1 trillion investment capacity until 2027, easily measuring up 
to our economic competitors. But we are too slow to spend this money, and 
spread it too thin over too many overlapping programmes. By the end of 2023, 
only 1/3 of the EU pandemic recovery fund had been used. All EU policies and 
economic  instruments  should  be  spent  on  and  in  support  of  the  shift  to  the 
sustainable and digital economy.

EU  public  investments  cannot  stand  on  their  own.  Our  businesses’  ability  to 
invest in and deliver a sustainable, competitive economy depends equally much 
on Europe being an attractive and easy place to do business. We must make 
it easier for businesses to invest, grow and expand within Europe. This means 
breaking down barriers and cutting red tape for entrepreneurs, small and large 
businesses in Europe. Keeping our markets open and resilient against hostile 
activities and malign behaviour and actors encouraging healthy competition 
and harnessing digitalisation is the only way forward.

ALDE Party Manifesto
9

ALDE Party fights for: An EU spending compass - 
sustainable, efficient, digital

• 

• 

• 

Consolidate  the  EU’s  many  budgetary  programmes,  funds,  and  facilities  to  simplify 
spending  and  clearly  prioritise  investments  and  innovation  in  the  sustainable  and 
digital transformation, resilience, and security across Europe, taking into account the 
real costs and benefits of investments for your future prosperity, resilience and security.

Shorten time for EU money to reach you and bring benefits in your community. Provide 
municipalities with more direct access to EU programmes such as the European social 
funds  and  open  more  avenues  for  direct  funding  for  municipalities,  cities,  and  civil 
society organisations. For nationally and centrally managed investment programmes, 
prevent duplication with additional national layers and rules and provide digital, “one-
stop” application procedures to ensure Europe achieves the economies of scale of our 
global competitors.

Ensure funding programmes, in particular regional and social funds, are robust and 
flexible enough to adapt to strategic challenges, including security, sustainability, and 
the  digital  transformation. These  programmes  should  be  capable  of  being  directed 
for crisis response targeted at communities and citizens, when needed, rather than 
creating additional red tape and administrative processes.

•  New  EU  resources  from  the  Emissions  Trading  System  (ETS),  the  Carbon  Border 
Adjustment Mechanism and the international tax on multinationals should be fit for 
purpose and earmarked to the sustainable, resilient and digital transition, not just a 
way to fill gaps in the general budget.

• 

Prioritise  EU  public  investments  that  have  a  cross-border  dimension  in  order  to 
achieve the economies of scale that the Single Market offers and promote industrial 
cooperation across the EU. Enforce the EU’s State Aid rules and avoid a generalisation 
of national subsidies that risk fragmenting the Single Market.

•  Adapt fiscal rules that promote healthy and prudent fiscal policies and do not open 
up for Member States to spend beyond their means. New fiscal rules must incentivise 
countries to reorient public investments towards the sustainable and digital transition. 
Any flexibility should not create distortions in the Single Market. Pensions and social 
security  policies  should  ensure  fairness  to  both  current  and  future  generations, 
through reform ensuring long term solvency in light of changing demographics and 
ageing populations.

Major crises have forced the EU to target and clearly prioritise funds towards strategic challenges: investing in your 
security and ensuring you benefit from the sustainable and digital transformation. The current inflation and debt 
accumulated due to the pandemic and energy crisis are challenges that require targeted investment and healthy 
budgetary  management  by  the  EU  and  Member  States.  European  liberals  will  deliver  a  resilient  EU  economic 
system through pragmatic and enforceable budgetary policies geared towards smart investments and budgetary 
discipline.

ALDE Party Manifesto
10

 
ALDE Party fights for: A competitive European 
market for you and businesses to thrive

•  An ALDE-led Commission would put the Single Market, which is still the backbone of 
our competitiveness and ability to create jobs, back on the EU agenda. Advancing and 
modernising  our  Single  Market  is  the  only  way  to  genuinely  enhance  Europe’s  open 
strategic autonomy; through efficient regulation, increased economic integration and 
removal  of  all  internal  borders  and  existing  barriers  for  products,  services  and  public 
procurement, making sure our innovators can access venture capital and investor funds 
across Europe.

•  Deepen both the European Capital Markets Union and the European Banking Union. On 
the primary capital market, the aim is to create better financing opportunities for private 
investments. A strong European capital market is needed to finance these investments.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Prioritise cutting administrative burdens and red tape by following the simple principle 
of  “one market, one rule”. lncrease European Parliamentary scrutiny on implementation 
to ensure that, once something has been regulated at the European level, the same rule, 
not 27 variations of it, applies across our internal market. Eliminate the need for European 
businesses, large and small, to jump through 27 national translations and agencies just 
to  sell  their  goods  and  services.  Equally,  areas  such  as  defence  equipment,  subsidies, 
and infrastructure should whenever possible be adapted to fulfil one common standard, 
rather than separate ones across Member States.

Set up a uniform digital reporting portal for the European Commission, where  companies 
can find relevant information on their different reporting obligations and submit all their 
reports  thereby  eliminating  duplication  and  reducing  the  administrative  burden  on 
companies.

Support  industries  of  all  sizes  across  a  wide  variety  of  sectors,  by  enabling  European 
innovative industries to scale up and go global and by maintaining the EU as an attractive 
investment destination for foreign businesses. Not by picking the winners and relying on 
industrial “champions”.

Provide equal opportunities for companies in taxation, while respecting national right to 
taxation. Member States are competing with each other for fiscal benefits that work for 
larger companies and undermine public spending. Simplify tax reporting arrangements 
and administration for workers and businesses operating across borders within the EU, 
and  support  the  implementation  of  the  Common  Consolidated  Corporate  Tax  Base 
(CCCTB), to create a fairer and simpler corporation tax system across Europe.

Protect the integrity of our internal market by making sure Europe’s economic rulebook 
is fit for purpose to ensure all businesses play by the same rules and focus on better 
enforcement of EU legislation in all Member States.

Conclude the Association Agreement between the EU and Andorra and San Marino to 
enhance the single market by strengthening ties with these microstates closely linked 
to EU decisions. 

The Single Market is the strongest and most successful part of the European integration and is setting standards 
worldwide. By creating a strong internal market, we have lowered costs, increased choice, and quality for you as 
a consumer, and created opportunities for our businesses to grow and create jobs. However, the internal market 
is  still  incomplete. We advocate for a frictionless Single Market that ensures an equal  and  competitive  business 
environment  at  the  EU  level,  while  protecting  consumers.  lnstead  of  focusing  on  subsidies  for  large  national 
companies, the EU should focus on structural competitiveness of the Single Market with special attention to small 
and medium-sized businesses and entrepreneurs, as they are the main job providers of the economy. The Single 
Market is Europe’s industrial strategy and the road to open strategic autonomy.

ALDE Party Manifesto
11

ALDE Party fights for: Accelerate energy 
saving and the deployment 
of renewable and clean energy

• 

• 

• 

Prioritise implementation of adopted energy and climate rules to reach our targets, 
including the 2040 target proposed by the European Commission, and ambitions to 
ensure you can fully benefit from and adapt to the sustainable transition. Empower 
the European Environmental Agency to become a fully operational authority ensuring 
consistent implementation of environmental standards across the EU and supporting 
the Member States on this.

To  effectively  manage  geopolitical  risks,  it  is  imperative  to  consciously  reduce 
dependence on external resources, especially those from non-democratic countries,  
notably  Russia  and  China,  placing  a  greater  emphasis  on  this  strategic  imperative. 
This approach will enhance the resilience and autonomy of our funding programmes, 
ensuring they are better aligned with our broader geopolitical and security goals.

lnvest in all types of renewable, carbon-neutral, low-carbon and waste-based energy 
sources,  including  nuclear  energy,  complemented  by  carbon  removal,  capture  and 
storage  technologies.  lncrease  public  and  private  collaboration  and  investments 
in  grid  capacity  and  storage.  Embrace  the  use  of  nuclear  power  as  a  tool  that  can 
accelerate  decarbonisation  by  reducing  reliance  on  gas,  oil,  and  coal  power,  while 
strongly rejecting the idea of  “green” natural gas.

•  Accelerate  energy  efficiency  and  savings  by  empowering  you  to  optimise  energy 
use and insulate and renovate your homes through incentives, digital solutions, and 
the  creation  of   “one-stop”  renovation  offices,  where  you  can  easily  access  all  the 
information and services required for your renovations. Governments must lead by 
example by promoting energy efficiency programmes for public facilities.

• 

Simplify,  shorten,  and  speed  up  the  digitalisation  of  licensing  and  permitting 
procedures  of  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency  projects  across  EU  Member 
States.

•  Deepen electricity interconnections between Member States to improve the efficiency 
and  integration  of  EU  electricity  markets,  increase  security  of  supply  and  reduce 
dependency on third-country suppliers. We must ensure that the EU interconnection 
target of at least 15% by 2030 is reached.

• 

Expand  the  scope  of  the  European  Emissions  Trading  System  (ETS)  to  cover  all 
remaining  carbon-polluting  sectors  and  develop  a  technology-neutral  certification 
system for verified negative emissions.

ALDE Party Manifesto
12

•  Develop  a  European  strategy  for  the  bioeconomy,  including  the  sustainable  use  of 

biomass incorporating land use considerations.

• 

• 

Facilitate intra-European cooperation across sectors, such as a functional pan-European 
rail network as well as research, innovation, and development and deployment of clean 
technologies.  The  European  Investment  Bank  should  contribute  with  investments 
in  critical  products  and  projects  within  green  energy  production,  technology,  and 
infrastructure, to ensure competitiveness against non-EU manufacturers, and ensure 
open strategic autonomy for the EU.

Enable decarbonisation for all types of transport, whether cargo or passenger, through 
infrastructure  development,  including  the  completion  of  missing  cross-border 
transport connections, electrification of public transport and charging infrastructure 
in  less  densely  populated  areas,  active  mobility  across  national,  regional,  and  local 
levels  as  well  as  using  sustainable  and  innovative  technologies  to  decarbonise  the 
freight and heavy goods transport.

The cheapest energy is the energy we do not use. Accelerating the deployment of renewable and clean energies gives 
us freedom by empowering us to reduce our dependencies on external resources. lt is crucial for heating our homes, 
transportation, and water distribution. We must use the full spectrum of solutions in our hands in combination with 
and upholding the principle of technology neutrality to reduce emissions and find alternatives for existing ones. 
By doing so, we can fight climate change by reducing the use of fossil fuels and stimulate our economic growth 
creating jobs, fostering innovation, and making energy more affordable for you.

ALDE Party Manifesto
13

ALDE Party fights for: A digital 
transformation that empowers citizens 
and businesses

• 

• 

Ensure a stable and clear digital rulebook to foster private investment, by focusing on 
the implementation of recently adopted rules. When new digital legislation is needed 
to  address  new  consumer  protection  and  potential  harm,  such  regulation  should 
focus  on  incentives,  technological  openness,  the  protection  of  citizens’  data  and 
privacy and the power of innovation to free up space for more investments. Ensure 
that digital technologies contribute to building democratic, creative, and humanistic 
public domain and force regulations which support its enlargement.

Implement a digital-first principle to promote the potential of digital technologies to 
facilitate your interactions with public administration, payments, or funding processes, 
and  create  the  right  environment  to  accelerate  the  digitalisation  of  European 
businesses and the public sector, such as healthcare.

•  Accelerate  deployment  of  secure,  resilient,  very  high-capacity  networks  using 
already  allocated  funds  to  bridge  the  connectivity  gap,  in  particular  in  small  cities, 
rural and remote areas by streamlining approval processes and strengthening public-
private  partnerships.  Support  the  green  transition  by  ensuring  high  quality  mobile 
network connectivity, capacity, and latency on railways. Ensure all such critical digital 
infrastructure complies with European and international security standards and does 
not create vulnerabilities and exposure to foreign interference from hostile state and 
non-state actors.

• 

Embrace  the  potential  of  new  digital  tools  such  as  artificial  intelligence  to  boost 
our  economy  and  improve  our  lives.  Foster  a  European-specific  vision  of  artificial 
intelligence  as  a  human-centric  innovation  that  prevents  authoritarian  practices 
through rules to protect our fundamental rights. European digital tools should reflect 
European  values  and  contribute  to  tackling  climate  change,  fostering  individual 
freedom  and  equality  of  opportunity,  and  enhancing  democratic  participation. 
Create  a  safe  online  environment  by  protecting  you  from  disinformation  made  by 
foreign governments, through the enforcement of recent digital rules, the EU Code of 
Conduct on Disinformation, and a European Digital Watchdog. Ensure that the online 
environment is a safe space for all users, in particular women and girls, and addresses 
the increase of cyberbullying.

ALDE Party Manifesto
14

• 

• 

• 

Foster  vocational  programmes  to  urgently  upskill  key  professions,  in  areas  such  as 
manufacturing,  education,  cybersecurity,  healthcare,  and  agriculture  with  digital 
know-how, to accelerate the digital transition and increase competitiveness. Vocational 
certificates should be recognised throughout Europe.

Foster digital equality by allocating European Social Fund (ESF), where legally possible, 
and  Recovery  and  Resilience  Facility  (RRF)  resources  for  the  development  of  digital 
competencies among adults, via employers and workplaces, with a specific focus on 
targeting vulnerable groups such as the elderly, those with low competencies (early 
school leavers), individuals with disabilities, and residents of underdeveloped regions. 
Additionally, enhancing the digital skills of students and teachers in public education 
is  of  paramount  importance.  This  can  be  achieved  through  the  development  and 
implementation  of  a  programme  by  the  EU,  which  also  defines  a  jointly-agreed 
minimum level of outcome competencies.

lncrease European, as well as attract highly skilled professionals to meet the growing 
demand  by  the  digital  sector,  with  a  specific  support  given  to  women  in  science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), in order for the European digital 
sector  to  compete  globally. With  our  societies  becoming  more  digital,  we  need  to 
increase the digital literacy and skills of all citizens to be safe and secure online.

We  support  a  safe  digital  environment  open  to  innovation  and  competitive  for  our  small  businesses  and 
entrepreneurs.  In  the  last  decade,  the  EU  has  made  a  major  push  in  regulating  digital  businesses  in  favour  of 
competition, privacy, and equal opportunities in our Single Market, as well as safety for consumers. These rules 
are milestones on the global stage, but for the European model to be successful, they need to be fully and correctly 
implemented.  New  legislation  should  prevent  over  burdening  businesses  with  regulatory  contradiction  and 
duplication. In the future it will not be the digital economy, the economy will be digital. We support bold action for 
a fair and competitive digital transformation.

ALDE Party Manifesto
15

ALDE Party fights for: A sustainable 
agriculture system that guarantees food 
production and safeguards biodiversity 

• 

Reform  the  Common  Agriculture  Policy  (CAP)  with  the  aim  of  lifting  bureaucratic 
burdens for farmers and supporting a sustainable food production with respect for 
biodiversity  and  animal  welfare.  Streamline  the  distribution  of  existing  funds  and 
incentivise  the  adoption  of  sustainable  practices  and  tools  such  as  crop  rotation, 
biochar  to  reduce  carbon  leakage,  and  precision  farming. The  main  purpose  of  the 
future  CAP  should  be  to  compensate  farmers  for  these  collective  goods  that  the 
market does not take into account, and which we expect them to provide. Reduction 
of bureaucratic burden for small and middle size farmers is of importance especially in 
some Member States.

• 

lntroduce new rules for genetically-engineered crops to increase productivity and to 
reduce the amount of pesticides used.

•  Actively  share  data,  foster  innovation,  and  invest  in  breakthrough  technologies 
to  make  better  decisions,  manage  our  resources  efficiently,  address  the  effects  of 
climate change, make groundbreaking advancements in agriculture and fisheries and 
safeguard biodiversity.

• 

Increase  the  capacity  of  transport  routes  through  the  EU  to  secure  food  supply  at 
affordable prices.

We want to foster an environment where you can thrive and seize opportunities, whilst mitigating the challenges 
of  climate  change,  keeping  food  affordable,  securing  our  food  systems,  and  promoting  rural  development.  We 
are committed to supporting and providing opportunities for consumers and farmers to adapt to the sustainable 
transition while reducing our agricultural sector’s climate impact. This significant shift can be done with collective 
effort and responsibility. Adopting sustainable agriculture and food system is essential for our well-being and to 
give  farmers  and  fishers  -  whether  small  or  big  -  a  long-term  perspective  and  predictability  while  safeguarding 
biodiversity, ocean, and water systems, preserving natural resources, and fostering economic growth.

ALDE Party Manifesto
16

ALDE Party fights for: An innovative, 
diversified and circular economy

• 

• 

• 

Provide businesses with incentives to invest in and adopt sustainable production to 
decouple economic growth from use of primary resources, including via diversification, 
reuse, and repair. Empower you to make informed decisions through carbon footprint 
transparency on product labels, as well as changing the rules on the date marking of 
food products.

Vigorously  oppose  premature  obsolescence  across  all  commercial  and  industrial 
sectors,  in  alignment  with  our  commitment  to  promoting  the  reuse  and  repair  of 
electronic appliances.

Tackle  waste  efficiently  through  innovative  product  design  and  packaging.  Explore 
the  possibilities  of  an  EU-wide  deposit  return  scheme  for  packaging  and  advanced 
container  standards.  Promote  investments  in  waste  management  and  recycling 
facilities  within  Europe.  Encourage  food  donations  and  make  it  easy  to  avoid  food 
waste.

•  Advance  the  quality  of  our  living  environment  through  policies  and  economic 
incentives  accessible  to  you  and  aimed  at  making  living  spaces  more  affordable, 
sustainable and energy efficient, while decreasing the material footprint of the built 
environment. 

We are committed to use our resources more efficiently and move to a circular economy, to reduce our dependencies 
on importing critical raw materials, especially those we need for clean energy and environmental improvements 
such as electric vehicles, smartphones, or solar panels. The EU is currently using more natural resources than our 
planet can replace in a year, causing climate change and harming biodiversity, while also making products more 
expensive and harder to get. We must harness the opportunity of renewables, innovative technologies, and nature-
based solutions to move to a circular and sustainable economy. This will not only improve our quality of life, but 
also secure vital resources for our businesses, make less waste and protect the environment.

ALDE Party Manifesto
17

 
ALDE Party fights for: Equip you with 
the right set of skills for the digital 
and sustainable transition

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Continuously  support  the  Bologna  Process  and  further  develop  the  European 
Universities  Initiative  to  ensure  a  thriving  and  durable  European  higher  education 
system; this is vital to promote your lifelong learning and a genuinely mobile labour 
force, and that is prepared for the digital and green transitions.

Ensure every European child learns at least one foreign language starting from primary 
school to enable them to communicate outside their Member State, regardless of their 
level of education.

Embrace transformative education strategies that foster opportunities for all children 
regardless of their background while incorporating a vision that prepares our children 
for the digital and green transitions ahead.

Create  a  truly  interconnected  labour  market  by  revising  the  mutual  recognition  of 
professional qualifications and academic and vocational degrees, to ensure that formal 
and informal learning is recognised and facilitate remote working across Europe.

Provide apprenticeships for the mid-career and extend the Erasmus+ programmes to 
students at all educational levels to ensure that everyone is skilled to contribute to our 
labour force, regardless of age.

•  Grant  EU-sponsored  summer  Interrail  passes  to  all  young  Europeans  completing  a 
vocational degree, to reward beneficial career choices to the European economy and 
to make Europe’s riches known to the many, not the few.

• 

• 

Implement fast lanes (EU blue card) to attract highly skilled specialists from outside 
Europe in key sectors such as engineering, sustainable and digital technologies, and 
healthcare,  but  also  lower  skilled  labour.  Efforts  should  be  made  to  facilitate  third-
country nationals holding national work permits to work in other Member States.

Facilitate legal pathways for labour migration within and across the EU, by implementing 
an  EU  talent  pool  and  simplifying  the  connection  between  employers  and  third-
country nationals in areas with labour shortages in Member States.

A dynamic and resilient labour market is essential to ensure you will be able to seize the opportunities from the 
digital  and  sustainable  transitions.  We  must  build  a  labour  market  that  is  adaptable,  inclusive,  and  capable  of 
supporting you in acquiring the skills and qualifications you need to thrive and have continuous opportunities, 
whether you live in North, South, East or West, city or countryside.

ALDE Party Manifesto
18

Earn Your trust 
through action 
and rEForm

Earn your trust 
through action 
and reform

European Liberals are at the forefront of defending the rule of law, your civic 
freedoms  and  your  fundamental  rights  and  ensuring  your  safety.  Attacks 
on  democracy  are  growing,  while  attraction  to  authoritarianism,  populism, 
nationalism and identitarianism increases in many Member States. We should 
not be complacent, but be the first ones fighting against cynicism.

Defending  democracy  needs  ongoing  commitment.  As  liberals,  we  must 
remember  that  democracy  is  not  only  about  elections.  Democracy  is  about 
protecting your individual rights, freedom, and rule of law, ensuring the right 
tools to tackle crime and keep you safe, and empowering you to shape your 
own destiny and make your voice heard. Achieving strong, stable, democratic, 
and functional institutions at every political level remains our main goal.

The  EU  is  a  unique  democratic  project,  but  reforms  are  needed  to  earn  your 
trust. We want to build a space where national, local, and European politicians 
connect with you to create fair, efficient, and transparent institutions, and hold 
accountable those that breach the rule of law.

A  liberal  democracy  has  three  basic  features:  democracy,  respect  for  human 
rights and the rule of law. Only when all three conditions are working we can 
talk about a functioning democracy.

In  such  a  society,  everyone  can  trust  that  they  will  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their 
own endeavours, and that authorities are equally bound by the principle that 
nobody is above the law. In order for the internal market of the EU to work, the 
rule of law must be respected. By respecting the rule of law, corruption can be 
fought, and an investment friendly climate is created.

ALDE Party Manifesto
20

ALDE Party fights for: lnstitutional reform 
to strengthen your voice in the EU

• 

• 

• 

• 

Reform the EU elections. Give you the choice to vote for any European representative 
who  best  represents  your  ideals,  also  if  they  have  another  nationality.  ALDE  Party 
continues to fight for transnational voting lists.

Reform the EU treaties to strengthen your active participation and increase transparency 
and  accountability  for  the  EU  to  meet  your  needs  and  key  concerns.  Open  the 
European Commission consultation process to encourage more citizen engagement, 
your engagement, including by better integrating local communities and subnational 
governments such as local and regional authorities. They are responsible for executing 
most  EU  laws  and  managing  half  of  the  EU’s  public  investment  and  are  crucial  for 
providing feedback on EU operations at the grassroots level.

Transform the European Commission into a true political leadership body and ensure 
efficient  governance  and  decision-making  by  breaking  down  the  siloed  approach, 
which leads to overlapping and contradictory legislation. Implement the “one in, one 
out”  approach  where  possible,  ensuring  that  with  each  new  regulation  introduced, 
an equivalent existing one is eliminated to avoid redundancy in the same policy area.

Establish an Erasmus programme for civil servants working at the EU institutions to 
foster understanding and cooperation between them and the Member States and to 
bring them closer to you.

•  Advocate for a single seat for the European Parliament, with right to initiate legislation 
and  power  to  cast  a  no-confidence  vote  against  any  member  of  the  European 
Commission.

• 

Encourage Member States to celebrate and mark Europe Day by declaring it a national 
holiday, following the example of Luxembourg.

It is time to develop functional mechanisms that regain your trust and allow for a meaningful involvement. We 
believe in a Europe where your voice is prominent, and you have a role to play in shaping the decisions that affect 
your life. It is only by having stronger EU institutions and vital channels of communication that your concerns and 
aspirations will be adequately represented in the decision-making processes. Through citizen initiatives such as 
the Conference of the Future of Europe, we have learned what changes you want. Now, it is time to implement and 
continue fighting for reform to reassure you that your future is in safe hands.

ALDE Party Manifesto
21

ALDE Party fights for: Defend the rule 
of law and slash corruption

•  Make full use of the conditionality principle in Article 7 and expand the annual rule of 
law report scope to include all values in Article 2 to protect and promote the rule of 
law, equality, respect for human rights and rights of minorities, to combat corruption 
and ensure adherence to our values. No rule of law, no EU money.

• 

• 

• 

• 

Ensure that the EU effectively guarantees the protection of the rule of law across the 
Union. Effectively uphold the integrity of institutions and fight against the worrisome 
erosion of the independence of the judiciary in the Union.

Remain vigilant on the protection of the rule of law in all Member States. The European 
Commission should consider the protection of the rule of law and European values 
as its core task. Any breaches of EU law or values should be followed by infringement 
procedures.

Further  develop  and  deploy  the  EU  rule  of  law  mechanism.  The  next  Multiannual 
framework should have clear conditionalities related to the rule of law.

Foster a professional, reforming, progressive and responsive civil service across all levels 
of  government  and  institutions  in  Europe  and  put  in  place  anti-corruption  policies 
including a system of indicators for policy monitoring to ensure impartiality, and to 
end clientelism and party politicisation, as well as to prevent impunity of corruption.

•  Make  it  conditional  to  receive  EU  funding  to  cooperate  with  the  European  Public 
Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO), which should have the ability to enforce sanctions beyond 
financial  penalties.  EPPO’s  powers  should  be  extended  to  include  all  serious,  cross  
border crime that cannot be handled by Member States alone.

• 

Establish an effective anti-corruption sanction regime in Europe and reinforce national 
anti-corruption  agencies  with  more  funding,  possibly  through  EU-level  initiatives. 
Secure the functioning of the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) by ensuring national 
cooperation and adherence to recommendations.

•  Uphold the right to association and assembly to protect civil society organisations, in 

particular those fighting to protect and promote democracy under threat.

Corruption  remains  a  problem  that  hurts  good  government,  trust  in  institutions  and  even  the  outcome  of 
elections. Cross-border and organised crime has increased, and some governments are more and more ignoring 
the  supremacy  of  EU  law  and  EU  court  rulings,  affecting  our  safety,  democratic  systems  and  cooperation.  We 
are committed to tackle crime, slash corruption and address rule of law breaches regardless of the perpetrators, 
whether governments or individuals, while advocating for targeted sanctions to avoid punishing innocent citizens 
and businesses.

ALDE Party Manifesto
22

ALDE Party fights for: Guarantee your 
individual freedom in an open 
and tolerant society

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Legalise  and  recognise  same-sex  marriage  and  rainbow  families,  and  ensure  their 
rights, including free movement within the EU, are enshrined in EU legislation. Continue 
improving LGBTI+ rights and supporting individuals in building their families through 
paths to recognised parenthood, protecting the rights of children.

Secure equal and safe access  to sexual and reproductive  health and rights, such as 
abortion and other gender-based care. lncorporate the right to abortion into the EU 
Charter of Fundamental Rights and continue striving for affordable contraceptives and 
menstrual health products. lntroduce an EU-wide ban on conversion therapy.

Combat gender-based violence by calling for the ratification of remaining countries to 
the Istanbul Convention, a harmonised definition of rape based on the lack of consent, 
and the implementation of EU-wide restraining orders. Enhance gender equality and 
combat the anti-gender movement strategically.

Break  down  barriers  by  increasing  diversity  in  all  spheres  of  influence  and  ensure 
sufficient access to parental leave across European countries and institutions, including 
the  recognition  of  parental  leave  for  Members  of  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
possibility to nominate another Member as substitute, as well as promoting a more 
balanced distribution of care responsibilities.

Fast-track the Horizontal Equal Treatment Directive to guarantee robust equal rights 
for LGBTI+ individuals in every sphere of life.

Expand the EU Crimes list to include hate speech and hate crime, and include gender, 
sex,  gender  identity  and  sexual  orientation  and  disabilities,  alongside  racism  and 
xenophobia, as areas in which hate crime can manifest itself.

Create  a  European  watchdog  to  protect  and  promote  media  freedom  and 
independence  across  Europe.  Effectively  prevent  and  prosecute  criminal  offences 
including child abuse, without thereby infringing the citizen’s right to privacy through 
imposing  mandatory  chat  controls  that  would  place  every  citizen  under  suspicion 
and violate end-to-end encryption. lnitiate a European fund for independent media, 
which will help independent media outlets when they are being targeted by Strategic 
Lawsuits Against Public Participation (SLAPPs).

Every one of us is free to be who we want to be, regardless of gender identity, sexual orientation, race, religion, or 
any other aspect of our identity. We are free to express ourselves, pursue our goals and make our own choices. As 
liberals, it is our duty to create a society that cherishes diversity and safeguards your right to live without fear in 
a  free  and  just  society.  We  will  continue  fighting  against  the  increased  conservative  trends  that  undermine  the 
principles of equality.

ALDE Party Manifesto
23

ALDE Party fights for: An asylum 
policy that works

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Reform the Common European Asylum System, aiming to stop the cynical and inhuman 
business model of smugglers, improve reception standards, share responsibility, and 
make asylum procedures human rights-based and more efficient.

Launch a European Action Plan for search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean, 
prioritising the safety and dignity of individuals in distress. Make sure that there are 
consequences for pushbacks, mistreatment of migrants, and other violations of the 
rights of migrants. Make agreements with third countries to halt irregular migration to 
the EU, while upholding and protecting human rights.

Simultaneously  reduce  push  and  pull  factors  of  migration  by  developing  effective 
partnership programmes prioritising job creation and climate change mitigation on 
the one hand, and implementing objective information campaigns about the realities 
of migration to counter disinformation provided by smugglers, on the other hand.

Provide specialised legal counselling to protect the rights of LGBTI+ individuals seeking 
asylum, even if they originate from a country officially-deemed ‘safe’.

Establish EU-managed common facilities outside the EU borders for asylum seekers, 
responsible for streamlined application processing.

Reform Frontex, the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, for effective control of 
EU external borders with respect for human rights.

•  Do  away  with  politically-driven  vetoes  and  fearmongering  using  migration,  and 
approve  full  accession  to  the  Schengen  Area  to  all  Member  States  that  meet  the 
required  criteria.  We  reaffirm  our  belief  that  strong  external  EU  borders  and  open 
internal  borders  boost  economic  growth,  business  and  transport  efficiency,  and 
cross-border  employment,  all  of  which  serve  to  speed  up  the  cohesion,  economic 
integration, and stability of our Union.

• 

Prioritise  integration,  including  through  EU  funds,  to  support  policies  such  as  the 
provision of basic skills, applying zero-tolerance for discrimination, promoting inter-
cultural  dialogue  and  language  learning,  as  well  as  buddy  schemes  to  facilitate 
integration at a micro-level.

•  Develop  effective  foreign  aid  programmes  prioritising  democracy  promotion,  job 

creation, and climate change mitigation.

Migration towards the EU has always existed and will always be part of our societies. We provide shelter to those 
who are fleeing war or persecution. We need to fight against human traffickers and smugglers, tackle irregular 
migration  and  make  the  return  and  readmission  policy  more  efficient  to  address  the  inhuman  consequences 
for migrants and disruptive effects on our countries. Additionally, with a decreasing and ageing population and 
worsening labour shortages, the EU must address headstrong the integration of migrants as part of a successful 
migration policy. We stand against populist anti-migrant rhetoric and policies that violate our liberal values, and 
worsen our competitiveness in the global labour market.

ALDE Party Manifesto
24

ALDE Party - Adopted in March 2024 - With the support of the European Parliament. The sole liability rests with the author; 
the European Parliament is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information contained therein.

