 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................... 4 
HUMAN DIGNITY ................................................................................................................................. 5 
BIO- ETHICS..................................................................................................................................... 5 
REPRODUCTION & CONTRACEPTION .................................................................................................. 6 
SURROGACY .................................................................................................................................... 6 
DISABILITY ...................................................................................................................................... 7 
AGING & EUTHANASIA ..................................................................................................................... 7 
HEALTHY FAMILIES .............................................................................................................................. 8 
RIGHTS OF CHILDREN ........................................................................................................................ 9 
FREEDOM OF EDUCATION ................................................................................................................. 9 
ECONOMY BENEFITTING PEOPLE AND PLANET ........................................................................................ 11 
STAKEHOLDER MODEL .................................................................................................................... 12 
TRADE & TRANSPORTATION ............................................................................................................ 12 
INNOVATION, RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ...................................................................................... 12 
FINANCE & SERVICES ..................................................................................................................... 13 
AGRICULTURE & FISHERY ............................................................................................................... 13 
SUSTAINABILITY & ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION ............................................................................... 14 
FREEDOM, SECURITY AND STABILITY ................................................................................................... 16 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS .......................................................................................................................... 16 
SECURITY & MIGRATION ................................................................................................................ 17 
FIGHTING MODERN SLAVERY ............................................................................................................. 20 
FORCED LABOUR............................................................................................................................ 20 
SEXUAL EXPLOITATION.................................................................................................................... 21 
REFORMING THE EUROPEAN UNION ................................................................................................... 23 
ROLE OF THE EU ............................................................................................................................ 23 
REPRESENTATION OF CITIZENS IN THE EU ......................................................................................... 23 
A NEW MODEL ............................................................................................................................... 24 
HONOURING EU’S CHRISTIAN ROOTS ................................................................................................. 25 
FREEDOM OF RELIGION OR BELIEF ................................................................................................... 25 
FREEDOM OF RELIGION AROUND THE WORLD ................................................................................... 25 
FREEDOM OF RELIGION IN EUROPE .................................................................................................. 26 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

Over  the  past  five  years,  the  European  Union  has  experienced  a  dynamic  and  transformative 
period marked by significant economic, social, and political developments. As we reflect upon this 
period,  it  becomes  evident  that  the  European  Union  has  been  shaped  by  both  challenges  and 
opportunities,  with  its  Member  States  navigating  various  crises,  implementing  reforms,  and 
striving for greater unity.  

The  outbreak  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in  2020  brought  about  an  unprecedented  economic 
shock,  testing  the  resilience  and  solidarity  of  the  Union.  As  Member  States  confronted  the 
immense  health  and  economic  challenges,  the  EU  acted  to mitigate  the  impact,  establishing  a 
comprehensive  recovery  plan  and  reinforcing  the  importance  of  cooperation  and  cohesion.  In 
some respects, we could argue that the efforts to contain the spread went too far, leaving people 
frustrated and isolated. We are all still learning lessons from the pandemic and making sense of 
what happened in order to be better equipped in dealing with the next crisis. 

The Russian Federation’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine added significantly to the strain Europe 
was  feeling  by  causing  a  major  displacement  of  people  within  Europe  and  by  challenging  the 
security in the region. The sanctions imposed by the European Union, although necessary, ended 
up triggering an energy crisis and high inflation.  

These  developments  compounded  the  already  existing  issues  in  the  European  societies.  Huge 
differences in employment, wealth and gross domestic product persist between the Northern/ 
Western Member States and the Southern/Eastern Europe ones. A mountain of debt still looms 
over Europe’s economies and our wealth remains connected to and dependent on undemocratic 
governments.  The  constant  pursuit  for  economic  growth  oftentimes  comes  at  the  cost  of  the 
environment  around  us.  We  are  proposing  ways  European  businesses  can  develop  and  thrive 
while using resources in a sustainable way because we believe caring for this planet is a God-given 
mandate. 

In this 2024-2029 political program, the European Christian Political Movement (ECPM) presents 
its  core  values  and  its  vision  on  how  to  face  the  current  EU  challenges  so  that  we  make  the 
European Union a better, safer place. With each European election, the ECPM wishes to highlight 
and promote the spearheads presented in this program, which we believe represent sensible and 
practical answers to Europe’s challenges.  

ECPM recognizes the European Union as a political and social reality and we have a constructive, 
but critical, approach to the current shape of the EU. In many cases, the level of involvement from 
the EU institutions needs to be reduced. We advocate for a strict adherence to the principle of 
subsidiarity and for clear reforms outlining the areas where EU institutions and regulations are 
still  needed.  In  this  document,  clear  distinctions  are  made  between  national  and  European 
competences.  We  are  a  forward-looking  party,  and  we  acknowledge  that  we  live  in  an 
interconnected  world  where  the  EU  is  simply  necessary.  We  appreciate  the  EU’s  role  in 
maintaining stability and security in Europe  and we honour the Christian roots it was  founded 
upon. 

The ECPM members all agree on the core issues presented in this document. This is our strength- 
that  we  are  united  and  can  work together on  the  fundamental values  we  share,  regardless of 
differences on smaller, singular issues. We look hopeful toward the future, and we work together 
for a Europe in which every voice is elevated and heard, empowered with tools, information and 
resources  so  that  we  can  successfully  engage  with  our  community  and  society  and  create  the 
world we dream of for the next generations. When you vote for ECPM candidates you can have 
faith in your vote!  

4 

 
 
 
HUMAN DIGNITY 

Summary 

▪  Human dignity- defined as the intrinsic value of every human being created by God- is 

the cornerstone of all human rights and of our values presented herein. 

▪  ECPM defends the right to life from conception until natural death. 
▪  We align ourselves with the principles stated in the Convention on Human Rights and 
Biomedicine  and  recognize  that  it  is  the  sole  competence  of  EU  Member  States  to 
legislate on bioethics and healthcare matters. 
▪  We stand firmly against all forms of surrogacy. 
▪  We  defend  the  right  to  life  of  babies  diagnosed  with  genetic  diseases  and  wholly 

support the worth and dignity of people living with disabilities. 

▪  ECPM  advocates  for  aging  with  dignity  and  amid  a  healthy  community.  We  choose 

palliative care as the only dignified and humane option for the end of life.   

Human dignity refers to the intrinsic value of every human being, it is the cornerstone of all human 
rights.  We  believe  this  universal  principle  rests  on  the  human  being  created  in  the  image  and 
likeness of God. The Christian understanding of God is Trinitarian, and therefore relational, which 
means that this is reflected in human existence. Politically, this means that human dignity is not 
merely about the value and rights of the individual, but about individuals in relationship with each 
other.  Human  dignity  includes  creating  right  and  just  relationships  between  people  and 
governments,  businesses,  and  environment.  We  believe  that  human  dignity  is  foremost  a 
responsibility: to love God and love your neighbours, and to protect people - especially the weak 
and the fragile.   

The intrinsic value of the human being includes every stage of the human existence. Excluding the 
beginning or the end of human life from the definition fundamentally undermines the intrinsic 
value of the human being and is therefore a violation of human dignity. Thus, there is a particular 
need to protect vulnerable, disabled, or unborn members of the human family. ECPM advocates 
that both European institutions and Member States should always uphold the principle of human 
dignity from conception until natural death. 

Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union: 
Art. 1: Human dignity is inviolable. It must be respected and protected. 
Art. 2: Everyone has the right to life. 

BIO- ETHICS 
Although  this  is,  in  general,  a  competence  of  the  Member  States,  the  development  of  new 
technology and greater integration have created breaches for the European Union institutions to 
interfere in bio-medical issues, leading to ECPM taking a position on these matters. 

The first and only legally binding international text designed to protect human dignity against the 
misuse of biomedicine is the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (Oviedo Convention), 
19971. It states that the interests of human beings must come before the interests of science or 

1 https://rm.coe.int/168007cf98 Text accessed July 2023. 

5 

 
 
 
 
society.  The  convention  prohibits  the  creation  of  human  embryos  for  research  purposes  and 
requires adequate protection of embryos where countries allow in-vitro research. It bans human 
cloning, trafficking of organs and tissues and, in general, the commercialization of the human body 
and  its  parts.  It  allows  the  cloning  of  cells  and  tissue  considered  to  be  ethically  acceptable 
worldwide,  but  it  argues  that  cloning  embryonic  stem  cells  should  be  approached  with  great 
reservations and left up to the individual states acceding to the Convention. In one of its protocols, 
it defines and safeguards fundamental rights in biomedical research, with a heavy emphasis on 
consent, safety and duty of care, confidentiality and the review of the research proposal by an 
ethics committee. These regulations are based on the principle of the individual as an end-in-itself 
and protecting the genetic make-up of the human species.  ECPM agrees, fully or in part, with the 
Oviedo Convention  and, according to the subsidiarity principle, supports its implementation  at 
national level as the EU Member States see fit. 

In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the vaccine mandate and the injuries sustained by some 
of those who got vaccinated, Art. 24 of the Convention is especially relevant: “The person who has 
suffered undue damage resulting from an intervention is entitled to fair compensation according 
to the conditions and procedures prescribed by law.” ECPM is demanding compensation for any 
vaccine-related injuries and to hold the responsible parties liable. The Convention, as well as the 
attached protocols, reiterate several times that refusal to give consent to medical research or a 
medical procedure “shall not lead to any form of discrimination against the person concerned, in 
particular  regarding  the  right  to  medical  care.”  ECPM  condemns  the  discrimination  faced  by 
people who, for various reasons, refused vaccination.  

REPRODUCTION & CONTRACEPTION 
ECPM  strongly  supports  the  Member  States’  right  to  establish  their  own  policies  regarding 
reproduction and we encourage them, as well as the EU institutions, to promote and protect life 
from conception to natural death.  

In line with Art.13(1) of the Regulation EC 726/ 20042 establishing the European Medicines Agency 
and Art. 4(4) of the Directive 2001/83/EC3 on the Community code relating to medicinal products 
for  human  use,  Member  States  are  free  to  prohibit  or  restrict  the  sale,  supply  or  use  of 
contraceptives or abortifacients. 

At the same time, we support our members’ initiatives at national level to support women and 
families in crisis, to demand increased state aid to pregnant women and to educate the general 
population, especially youth,  about the  preciousness of life  and other choices at  their disposal 
(like adoption, for example). 

SURROGACY 
ECPM  members  stand firmly  against any form of surrogacy.  It goes  against  human dignity and 
reduces people to commodities. The surrogacy process most often involves a contract, in which 
the commissioning woman, man, or couple have ownership over another woman’s womb (the 
surrogate mother) for the duration of the pregnancy. They can dictate and decide what happens 
to the baby if it is revealed that it has defects or diseases; they can force the surrogate mother to 
undergo an abortion, even if she disagrees, because they are the “owners” of the pregnancy. This 
right of ownership over someone else’s body could be regarded as violating Article 1 of the Geneva 
Convention: “Slavery is the status or condition of a person over whom any or all of the powers 

2 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:02004R0726-20220128#tocId20  
3 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32001L0083&qid=1690457282467  

6 

 
 
attaching to the right of ownership are exercised.”4 The right to property includes the right to use, 
enjoy and dispose of it; all three of these principles are found in surrogacy agreements, which 
makes the commissioning party the owner(s) of the surrogate mother’s womb and pregnancy.  

It also violates the human dignity of the child, since it is now considered the object or product of 
a contract, of a transaction. The right of a child to know his biological parents and be raised by 
them (Art. 7 of the International Convention on the Rights of the Child5) could be endangered as 
well,  depending  on  the  surrogacy  agreement.  In  cases  of  surrogacy,  up  to  six adults  can  claim 
parental rights over the child. This can lead to many legal complications, especially when there is 
an international/ cross-border dimension to the case. 

We  stand  against  the  European  Commission’s  Proposal  for  a  Council Regulation  (2022)  on  the 
creation  of  a  European  Certificate  of  Parenthood6  which  undermines  the  Member  States’ 
sovereignty, the principle of subsidiarity, and would legalize surrogacy in all States, violating the 
human dignity of women and children by reducing them to commercial products. 

DISABILITY 
ECPM is firmly committed to protecting and promoting the rights and needs of individuals living 
with  disabilities.  Regardless  of  physical  or  cognitive  limitations,  the  life  of  every  person  is  of 
immeasurable  value.  We  are  dedicated  to  dismantling  barriers  and  discrimination  to  ensure 
people with disabilities can lead fulfilling and dignified lives. This includes advocating for inclusive 
educational systems, employment opportunities and easy access to public facilities. We support 
the full implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities7 and call 
on the EU and Member States to do so by providing the financial and legal support necessary.  

AGING & EUTHANASIA 
Thanks to better healthcare, people in Europe live longer, but they are also at a higher risk for 
poverty, loneliness and depression as they age. ECPM stands for aging with dignity. The elderly 
should be treated with respect and gratitude for all the work they did in their lives; they should 
also receive the pension they are owed adjusted for the cost of living. In the case of homemakers, 
we propose they receive retirement benefits in line with minimum wage rates. We support efforts 
and initiatives which seek to alleviate loneliness and depression in the elderly, and which promote 
mental health, an autonomous lifestyle and community. ECPM advocates for inter-generational 
solidarity, where people can take care of each other. We think that informal and customized care 
should be prioritized. Those taking care of their neighbours or family members should get financial 
support for their work. Occupational therapy or special coaching by  mobility  experts  helps the 
elderly to maintain an autonomous living. 

ECPM strongly advocates  for palliative  care as the  only option for end-of-life stage. Ending life 
when it is ‘not worthy to live’ is not acceptable to us, since that runs contrary to the intrinsic value 
of the person. Having a robust social network, customized care, life-coaches for mental health and 
quality palliative care means life can be dignified until the end.  

4 https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/slavery-convention  
5 www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/crc.pdf  
6 https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/policies/justice-and-fundamental-rights/civil-justice/family-
law/recognition-parenthood-between-member-states_en  
7 https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/convention-rights-persons-disabilities  

7 

 
 
HEALTHY FAMILIES  

Summary 

▪  ECPM considers the family as the indispensable unit of society, and which needs to be 

respected and protected. 

▪  We denounce and reject the EU institutions’ interference in and pressure on Member 

States regrading family policy. 

▪  ECPM  members  actively  support  national  policies  which  promote  parenthood  and 

create flexible conditions for child rearing. 

▪  ECPM condemns any form of domestic violence and supports victims coming forward 

and reporting it. 

▪  We  state  the  parents’  right  of education  of  their  children  and  affirm  their  power  of 

information + decision on the subjects they learn in school. 

In  line  with  our  relational  thinking  and  Christian  tradition,  we  see  family  as  the  primordial 
structure,  preceding  the  state  and  any  other  community  or  group.  Healthy  families  lead  to  a 
healthy  society;  therefore,  values  which  are  essential  for  a  healthy  family  –  love,  solidarity, 
altruism,  faithfulness  -  should  be  promoted  in  the  public  sphere,  especially  via  educational 
policies. In times of crisis, we advise counselling; we stand firm for the rights of children in case 
marriages are ending.  ECPM promotes the sovereignty of the family, based on marriage between 
one man and one woman, and recognizes its inherent rights that are inalienable. As such, ECPM 
promotes (national) policymaking which puts family in focus. 

ECPM  believes  that  family  policy  is  foremost  a  matter  of  national  competence.  Based  on  the 
principle  of  subsidiarity,  the  European  institutions  should  not  interfere  in  family  policies  of 
Member  States.  However,  there  are  related  areas  where  the  EU  has  legislative  powers,  as  for 
example labour laws. ECPM asks that the European Union exercise power in these areas carefully, 
fully respecting the opinions of the Member States. We demand that the EU refrains from taking 
any  initiatives  on  family  policy  or  from  proposing  legislation  that  goes  against/  over  national 
legislation of Member States, or which is pushing for alternative family forms.  

At  a  national  level,  ECPM  members  support  policies  promoting  parenthood  and  creating 
conditions  that  are  conducive  to  child-raising.  We  are  concerned  about  the  European 
demographic  winter  and  worry  about  its  economic  consequences.  We  advocate  for  policies 
fostering  reconciliation  between  qualifications,  labour  market  participation  and  family  life. 
Parents should have the choice between childcare services and working fewer hours to take care 
of their children, especially if it concerns children with disabilities. Flexible work conditions (work-
provided  childcare,  job  sharing,  remote  working,  sabbatical  leave  etc.)  are  also  important  for 
single  parents  who  have  less  income  and  would  have  a  difficult  time  caring  for  their  children, 
employment, and household tasks. ECPM is strongly in favour of parental leave and care.  

We recognize the particular vulnerability of people with basic skills  who need to support their 
family.  This  is  compounded  by  automatization  already  replacing  many  of  the  low-skilled  jobs. 
Undeniably,  there  is  a  threat  of  long-term  unemployment  increasing  for  this  group  of  the 
population. Based on Christian principles, ECPM strongly favours inclusive national policies where 
people  are  supported  to  further  their  education,  they  are  put  in  contact  with  available  job 
opportunities and re-trained, when necessary.  

8 

 
 
 
We  are  concerned  about  the  rise  in  domestic  violence.  We  condemn  any  sort  of  abuse  and 
violence and find it particularly reprehensible when it occurs between spouses or inside the family. 
ECPM strongly supports reporting such instances to authorities, coupled with counselling, anger 
management classes, addiction and rehabilitation programs, as well as lifelong mentorship and 
accountability systems.    

RIGHTS OF CHILDREN 
The rights of the child are set out in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (Article 24/2) and the 
UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  (CRC).  ECPM  supports  the  principle  that  the  best 
interests of the child should be the primary consideration in all actions concerning children, and 
that a balance needs to be struck with the need to keep families together.8 We believe the rights 
of children already start at conception; therefore, unborn children should be included in the right 
to life. We advocate for support, training, and financial support for expectant mothers. 

Children are particularly vulnerable to poverty, social exclusion, violence, and abuse. International 
commitments for the improvement of the lives of children such as the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) are a necessary first step, but we call on the EU Member States to do more: to adopt 
specific  legislation  guaranteeing  daily  meals,  free  primary  and  secondary  education,  children 
allowance and to invest in developing recreational community centres.  

EU Charter of Fundamental Rights 
Article  24.2:  In  all  actions  relating  to  children,  whether  taken  by  public  authorities  or 
private institutions, the child's best interests must be a primary consideration. 

UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 
Art.3.2:  States  Parties  undertake  to  ensure  the  child  such  protection  and  care  as  is 
necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her 
parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this 
end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures. 

We take note of the adoption of the EU Commission strategy- Better Internet for Kids9- in 2022 
and we continue to advocate for increased protection of children online, including the passing of 
an  EU  Directive  against  cyberbullying.  We  are  staunch  defenders  of  children’s  privacy  and 
innocence online and we encourage programs which prevent and fight addiction in children and 
youth. 

FREEDOM OF EDUCATION 
We affirm that education is a competence of the Member States, not of the European Union. We 
condemn  the  increasing  trend  of  political  and  ideological  interference  in  school  curricula,  in 
subjects taught, as well as in methods. ECPM believes that parents should have the freedom to 

8 https://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-en.asp?fileid=25014  
9 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-better-internet-kids  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
choose how they want to raise their children and which values and beliefs they want to pass on 
to them. We advocate for the parents’ right to be informed about and to oppose certain views or 
subjects be taught to their children in school.  

We are firmly against the early sexualization of children through so-called educational or cultural 
materials. It poses significant risks to the children’s wellbeing and development. ECPM members 
work tirelessly in their home countries to counter any and all efforts which sexualize children. 

Education is essential for today’s children to be tomorrow’s independent, smart, well-adjusted 
adults  and  for  their  gifts  and  abilities  to  be  nourished  and  developed.  In  general,  we  find  it 
beneficial for children to go to school and interact with other children there; this develops their 
social  skills  as well.  In  certain  cases,  however,  home-schooling  may  be  a valid  alternative.  The 
neglect of rural schools and the brain drain toward urban areas particularly worries us. We urge 
national  governments  to  invest  more  in  local  schools  and  to  shorten  the  distance  between  an 
educational institution and the community.  

10 

 
 
ECONOMY BENEFITTING PEOPLE AND PLANET  

Summary 

▪  ECPM  advocates  for  a  relational  view  of  the  economy  where  healthy  relationships 
between  people  is  the  end  goal  of  systems  and  structures,  rather  than  increasing 
profits. To that end, we favour small & medium enterprises, family-owned business and 
stakeholder business models. 

▪  We are critical of international agreements which disempower communities and even 
countries. We equally condemn concentration of power by merging mega companies 
and monopolization. Any policy which deprives the global South of equity and justice 
and perpetuates the colonial extraction model is to be rejected. 

▪  ECPM supports innovation as long as it does not infringe on human dignity and human 
rights, as long as it does not violate privacy rights and doesn’t harm the environment. 
We propose a mixed private/public R&D environment working towards making Europe 
self-reliant, competitive and sustainable. 

▪  We acknowledge both the advantages and disadvantages of having a single currency in 
the EU. We believe that joining the single currency area should be a merit-based, and 
not  a  politically,  ideologically  driven  process,  and  it  should  be  clearly  based  on  the 
sovereign  decision  of  the  Member  State.  ECPM  demands  that  fiscal  and  cohesion 
policies prioritize SMEs, regional companies, rural areas and communities. We oppose 
the trend aiming for a cashless society. 

▪  The principle of subsidiarity must be respected fully when allocating CAP funds. While 
the  EU  has  a  general  responsibility  to  ensure  food  security  and  quality,  the  specific 
measures need to be decided at national level. 

▪  ECPM believes Christians have a God-given duty to care for and the privilege to benefit 
from the creation and the earth’s resources. We support local and circular economic 
solutions. 

We are the first European political party to adopt a relational view of the economy and to propose 
it as a working policy for the European Union. Simply put, a relational view of the society holds 
that healthy relationships between people is to be the underlying theme and end goal of systems. 
In other words, we put people  and planet  before profits. Economic growth  must  serve human 
dignity  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word.  We  advocate  for  economic  policies  which  take  into 
account  their  impact  on  relationships  between  peoples,  between  institutions,  between 
stakeholder groups, and between individuals, and which are tested to produce greater interaction 
and  mutual  understanding,  fairness  to  all  included  parts,  and  a  convergence  of  purpose  and 
values.  

EU and Member States’ economic policies should: 

•  be people and family-centred, not driven by short-term profits;  
•  apply  the  potential  of  technology  by  respecting  human  dignity  and  caring  for  the 

environment; 

•  practice transparency; 
• 
•  be  as  inclusive  as  possible  (reject  pressure  from  vested  interests  at  the  expense  of  other 

cultivate long- term thinking; 

stakeholders); 

•  not erode the rule of law and democracy; 
•  encourage and support local entrepreneurship and small & medium enterprises (SMEs). 

11 

 
 
 
STAKEHOLDER MODEL 
Based  on  this  relational  thinking,  we  encourage  the  development  of  small  and  medium-sized 
companies  (counting  for  two  thirds  of  private  sector  jobs  in  the  EU)  and  we  advocate  for  an 
investment-friendly climate for innovative entrepreneurs. We propose the stakeholder-focused 
business form (cooperatives, employee-owned business etc.) as a more just and healthier model 
to build the economy. Concentration of (political and economic) power can lead to corruption, to 
greedy  extraction  of  resources  and  lack  of  accountability.  We  are  critical  of  the  view  that 
privatisation  is  the  answer  to  any  public  service  that  is  not  functioning  optimally,  and  we 
recommend a case-by-case approach where fairness, affordability and efficiency are respected. 

TRADE & TRANSPORTATION 
ECPM  is  critical  of  international  trade  agreements  which  disempower  people  (and  sometimes 
even countries) merely for the benefit of multinationals and the world of international finance. 
The  principles  of  free  trade  and  open  market  economy  are  essential  to  Europe’s  economies; 
however, there need to be checks and balances in the system to keep it sustainable. We are in 
favour of mutually  beneficial agreements, which comply  fully with regulation,  to which proper 
taxation is applied and where workers’ rights are upheld and working conditions are humane and 
compliant. We also believe that the growth a company experiences from trade should translate 
into growth, stability and well-being for its workers and the community at large. 

Regarding  infrastructure  and  transportation,  which directly  affects trade,  a  better  connectivity 
and seamless transfers are necessary. We call for removal of bottlenecks, clear legal frameworks 
and enforcement, and fair and safe working conditions. Since transportation is the second-largest 
source  of  emissions  in  Europe,  we  support  efforts  to  decarbonize  it  and  replace  it  with  clean, 
sustainable options.  The  transition  needs to  be  gradual  and  in  places  where  citizens  would  be 
heavily impacted, we call for governments to subsidize and mitigate the impact. 

INNOVATION, RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 
ECPM believes  that  God  gave  people a mandate  to develop  and  care for  His creation (Genesis 
2:15),  and  as  such,  we  need  to  be  aware  and  involved  in  the  conversation  about  technology, 
artificial intelligence (AI), bio-ethics etc. Innovation is not a neutral subject but requires careful 
and  ethical  consideration.  It  should  especially  foster  greater  interaction  between  people  and 
strengthen relationships and communities. We support innovation as long as it does not infringe 
on human dignity and human rights, as long as it does not violate privacy rights and doesn’t harm 
the environment. We recognize that innovation is sometimes not a pleasant process for citizens 
and established companies, therefore we advocate for support and re-training for those who need 
it.  

We support  ongoing efforts to make  our continent  self-sufficient, to reduce  supply  chains and 
reliance on countries like Russia and China. Europe needs to continue strengthening its position 
in the world as a technology hub by investing more in Research & Development. For decades now, 
the average spending on R&D of EU member states is lower than the OECD10 average11, despite 
sustained efforts by the EU.  

We  propose  striking a  balance  between  government-  funded  R&D  and  private efforts.  Leaving 
research and development completely to the market is risky, since large corporations  who can 
afford it are mainly interested in maximising profits, while ethical concerns are secondary. They 
will also swallow up smaller enterprises which come up with new inventions, further consolidating 

10 OECD- Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development 
11 https://data.oecd.org/rd/gross-domestic-spending-on-r-d.htm  

12 

 
 
their power; this is why antitrust laws are essential for preventing monopolies and maintaining 
healthy competition. On the other hand, government funding can help develop technologies and 
services which directly benefit consumers but may not generate significant profit. It can directly 
set up innovation incubators or fund labs and projects via higher education institutes, whether 
public  or  private.  We  also  advocate  for  governments  to  reduce  innovation  barriers,  such  as 
unnecessary  bureaucracy  or  excessive  taxation.  Small  entrepreneurs  should  especially  benefit 
from government support and protection. The EU can play a major role in harmonizing rules and 
regulations for innovative technologies between Member States. 

In order to foster innovation, ECPM members highly favour diversifying education on one hand 
and fighting corruption on the other. Higher education must be encouraged and made accessible/ 
affordable  to  anyone  who  wishes  to  pursue  it,  while  trades  and  vocational  training  should  be 
equally  available  throughout  the  European  Union.  ECPM  strongly  supports  fighting  corrupt 
behaviour, oligarchic tendencies, bribery and nepotism which are detrimental to competitiveness 
and the countries’ economic health in the long run. 

FINANCE & SERVICES 
Here are a few policy recommendations we put forward: 

shift  the  burden  of  proof  in  EU  Merger  Control  to  require  not  just  clear  absence  of 

• 
redirect the cohesion policies in such a way that regional-based companies and inclusive 
business models can get preference treatment in economic stimulation programs and tendering. 
We want to end the current practice where large companies & multinationals are automatically 
the  largest  beneficiaries  of  EU  economic  support  policies  (both  in  the  CAP12  and  cohesion 
policies); 
• 
negative outcomes but demonstration of positive social benefits; 
• 
joining the single currency area should be merit-based, and not a politically, ideologically 
driven process, and it should be clearly based on the sovereign decision of the Member States. 
ECPM demands that fiscal and cohesion policies prioritize SMEs, regional companies, rural areas 
and communities. 
• 
well as other non-GDP measures; 
• 
that directly measure relationship quality between stakeholders; 
• 
expand  the  agreement  reached  over  tax  avoidance  by  lowering  the  turnover  ceiling 
significantly in order to achieve that 90% of multinationals will have to publish a breakdown of 
the tax they pay in each of the bloc’s Member States and in tax havens (increased country-by-
country reporting); 
• 
renounce the idea of eliminating cash; 
• 
European  political  parties  and  foundations  need  to  be  relieved  from  the  obligation  to 
match-fundraise  in  order  to  reduce  undue  influence  by  large  and  multinational  business  in 
European politics. 

make integrated reporting the European standard for corporations and introduce metrics 

use the Human Development Index as measurement of economic progress at EU level as 

AGRICULTURE & FISHERY 
For the European single market to function properly, there needs to be a level playing field and a 
set  of  rules  acceptable  for  all  stakeholders  involved.  The  common  provisions  regulating  the 
structural and investment funds (ESI) for regional development can be found in Regulation (EU) 

12 CAP- Common Agriculture Policy 

13 

 
 
No 1303/2013.13 We agree with Art. 174 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union 
(TFEU)14  that  we  should  strengthen  our  cohesion  by  reducing  disparities  between  levels  of 
development of the various EU regions, and that particular attention should be paid to rural areas.  

Agriculture is one of the biggest expenses of the European Union; for the 2021-2027 period, 387 
billion in funding has been allocated to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).15 ECPM calls for 
serious  reform  of  the  CAP,  where  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  is  respected.  The  agricultural 
conditions  vary  greatly  from  country  to  country  and,  while  food  security  and  quality  products 
should  be  the  EU’s  goal  in  deploying  the  CAP  funds,  the  specific  measures  should  be  set  and 
enforced  by  national  governments.  We  disagree  with  blanket  policies  imposed  in  a  top-down 
manner from Brussels and which are difficult or impossible to implement by some farmers. We 
believe agriculture, fishery and nature conservation can go hand in hand. 

Regarding fishery, ECPM believes that it should be a priority to value the contribution of fisheries 
to food security. The 2013 reform of the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) centred around setting 
sustainable  catch  limits  with  the  objective  to  restore  stocks, maintain  healthy ecosystems  and 
safeguard stable, profitable fisheries for the EU fleet. However, it has also led to many practical 
problems in the field. The unworkable landing obligation, which bans the discarding of unwanted 
bycatch, should be repealed and there should be a better balance between the three pillars of 
sustainability (people, planet, profit). The EU should stimulate green innovations, such as pulse 
fishing.  One  of  the  major  challenges  will  be  to  keep  enough  space  for  fisheries  in  light  of  the 
growing spatial claim of offshore renewable energy and nature protection. Multiple use of these 
areas  can  be  a  solution.    The  CFP  also  called  for  a  more  regional  approach  with  only  a  basic 
framework from Brussels, which ECPM supports. 

SUSTAINABILITY & ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION 
ECPM believes that wise stewardship of the environment and its resources is a biblical assignment. 
Most scientists agree that human actions have a large effect on our planet and climate. ECPM 
agrees that we need to improve our resilience in the face of climate change and that we have a 
responsibility towards future generations. We reject any suggestion that family values and having 
children  is  harming  the  environment  and  that  the  burden  and  cost  of  environmental  policies 
should be shouldered solely by the taxpayer. We also advocate for economic justice and equitable 
development  between  Europe  and  the  global  south  and  are  against  greedy,  colonial-minded 
extraction of the South’s resources and its pollution. 

The EU institutions in collaboration with the Member States should continually look for ways to 
protect the environment in a manner that does not stifle technological innovation. It is not an 
either/or  situation,  ECPM  argues  that  technological  innovation  can  be  used  to  protect  the 
environment, offset the negative effects caused by people & industry, and also to provide us with 
the energy and resources we need to live. The market for clean energy needs to reflect the current 
technological possibilities as well as to respect the principles of fair market competition. The EU 
should assist Member States to meet these standards and to invest in innovative economies. 

We  affirm  the  European  institutions’  role  in  promoting  clean  and  sustainable  industries  and 
business practices, in encouraging innovation and in making sure the polluter pays (however, this 
principle cannot be abused to mean that a company is free to pollute as long as they pay). We 
condemn the use of forever chemicals (PFASs) and call on the EU to permanently ban their use. 

13 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32013R1303  
14 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT  
15 https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/common-agricultural-policy/cap-overview/cap-2023-27_en  

14 

 
 
We also call on the EU to take measures to reduce the harmful effects of (micro) plastics on human 
beings and the environment, including by significantly reducing their use. 

Like the other policies mentioned, and in line with our relational thinking, we believe that caring 
for the creation needs to take place at all levels. At grassroots level, individuals need to adjust 
their  mindset  and  habits  regarding  food  waste,  use  of  plastics  and  chemicals,  and  travelling. 
Entrepreneurs  and  businesses  need  to  build  in  sustainability  in  their  models.  States  and 
governments  must  educate  the  population  on  the  effects  of  their  choices,  must  provide 
incentives, and legislate to protect the water, land and air for their citizens.  

15 

 
 
 
FREEDOM, SECURITY AND STABILITY 

Summary 

▪  ECPM’s  approach  to  foreign  affairs  is  based  on  human  dignity:  we  promote 
fundamental human rights as the best way to counter extremism and violence. Foreign 
policies are the competence of Member States. 

▪  We are in favour of all European military co-operation be conducted within the NATO, 
while respecting the neutrality of some Member States. We call for an immediate end 
to  Russia’s  aggression  in  Ukraine  and  for  a  just,  stable  and  equitable  peace  to  be 
restored, with a primary aim of securing the territorial integrity of Ukraine.  

▪  ECPM encourages  solidarity  among Member  States  when  it  comes  to  migration  and 

refugees and securing borders.  

▪  We are in favour of including Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area. 
▪  The  EU  must  collaborate  to  increase  its  resilience  against  cyberthreats  and  cyber 

terrorism. 

▪  We call for an urgent assessment of the foreign aid the EU disburses to third countries 

and for prioritising the countries and regions which respect human rights. 

ECPM stands for fundamental freedoms, underpinned by human dignity as the cornerstone, and 
we work to see them respected and applied everywhere in the world. We believe that societies 
which have human rights and freedom as their foundation are not easily susceptible to abuses of 
power, dictatorship or authoritarianism but they are stable, thriving environments. The best way 
to counter terrorism, conflict and humanitarian crises around the world is to promote and insist 
on the adoption and implementation of fundamental human rights in those societies.  

FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
The ECPM approach to foreign affairs is based on the Christian understanding of human dignity. 
Fundamental freedoms such as freedom of religion and belief, freedom of expression and political 
freedoms are the safeguard and practical expression of this understanding of human dignity. It is 
our firm conviction that the spread of fundamental freedoms is key for the development of a more 
secure and stable world. It is important that in our policies we apply the same principles at home 
and abroad.  

Foreign affairs continues to be the competence of the Member States. We would like to see the 
EEAS’16 role be kept as facilitator/ mediator/ ambassador, acting on policies determined by joint 
decision of the Member States. The power and initiative should rest with the foreign offices of the 
Member States, and not be imposed on them from Brussels. We urge the EU Member States to 
engage much stronger with all political and society actors in the Middle East, North Africa (MENA) 
and Asia that support and implement fundamental freedoms such as freedom of religion, equality 
of  women,  freedom  of  expression  and  democratic  multi-ethnic  governance;  they  should  get 
preferential treatment when it comes to aid and trade.  

The ECPM supports Israel’s right to exist; we wish to see a just and lasting peace in the region, 
achieved by political means by the actors on the ground. 

16 EEAS- European External Action Service 

16 

 
 
 
 
SECURITY & MIGRATION 
Cooperation between Member States in the field of security should centre on four areas: military 
co-operation, border security, cyber security, and anti-terrorism. 

Military co-operation 
ECPM is in favour of all European military co-operation be conducted for now within the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), while respecting the neutrality of some EU Member States. 
Europe has been leaning on the USA for security and defence for many years now, but it is time 
for  Europe  to  develop  mechanisms  to  defend  itself. In  line  with  EU’s  principle  of  subsidiarity, 
defence matters fall under the authority of the sovereign Member States. A single defence market 
would reduce the sovereignty of smaller Member States and nations would lose sovereign control 
over defence manufacturing capabilities in favour of big military industrial groups which would 
have profits as their priority, not the security of the peoples of Europe. However, we encourage 
cooperation between Member States, harmonising equipment and tools, training together, and 
standardizing  procedures  and  operations  (for  example,  the  creation  of  a  rapid  response  task 
force). 

“A common de-nationalised army would, and could, no longer owe obedience to 
a national authority, either as a whole nor in respect of the units of which it is 
composed. It would have sworn loyalty to the Community. The Community alone 
would have power over it. If any of its units were to follow the orders of a national 
Government, they would be regarded as deserters or rebels. If, therefore, such an 
army  is  set  up,  the  only  valid  orders  will  have  to  come  from  an  authority 
recognised by all the participating States.”- Robert Schuman 

The current war of aggression started by Russia in Ukraine constitutes a threat for EU Member 
States like Poland, Romania, and the Baltic countries. We call for the internationally recognized 
borders of Ukraine to be respected by the Russian Federation. At the same time, we urge solidarity 
with the border countries in dealing with the refugee influx and the impact the war is having on 
their energy, economy and trade.  

Border security  
The European Union does not have any internal border controls anymore (Schengen area), except 
with  Romania,  Bulgaria,  Cyprus  and  Ireland.  The  lack  of  internal  borders  also  creates  some 
vulnerabilities,  while  the  member  countries  forming  the  external  border  of  the  Union  have  a 
bigger responsibility and burden to maintain the safety of the Union than the interior countries 
do. ECPM calls for  increased  support for the  border countries, either financially or in terms of 
personnel. A majority of ECPM members also support Romania’s and Bulgaria’s inclusion in the 
Schengen area. 

The  aftermath  of  the  refugee  crisis  in  2016  opened  up  some  fundamental  debates  about 
migration, about economic stability and about solidarity among EU member states.  We believe 
foreign affairs and migration policies should take into account the internal realities and challenges 
of a Member State. ECPM is in favour of solidarity among the EU Member States when it comes 
to  refugees  and  asylum  seekers;  we  welcome  the  Voluntary  Solidarity  Mechanism  adopted  in 
2022.17 We condemn Turkey’s frequent attempts at blackmailing the European Union in exchange 

17 https://home-affairs.ec.europa.eu/news/european-solidarity-action-over-5-000-relocations-greece-2022-10-12_en  

17 

 
 
for membership or certain political favours and using migrants as bargaining chips. Any deals with 
third-party countries regarding migrants must include sufficient guarantees that human rights are 
not violated; effective mechanisms which ensure this need to be developed. 

Concerning refugees, we believe that the human dignity of the refugee should be protected at all 
times. The asylum-seeking procedure should be fast, thorough, and humane; the applicant must 
be provided with shelter, food and basic services. If approved, their integration into society needs 
to happen as soon as possible; churches and NGOs should be encouraged to assist in this. We are 
in favour of integration policies which respect the  refugees’ culture and background but which 
educate  and  promote  a  human  rights-centred view.  We  find  practices  like  forced  or  underage 
marriage,  female  genital  mutilation,  shunning,  etc.  reprehensible,  and  Sharia  law  deeply 
incompatible  with  European  life  and  society.  Human  trafficking/  smuggling  is  a  real  threat  for 
people  fleeing  a  crisis  and  in  a  vulnerable  situation;  the  European  Union  agencies  (Frontex, 
Europol)  need  to  do  everything  they  can  to  prevent  and  apprehend  those  trafficking  human 
beings.  Unaccompanied  refugee  minors  need  to  be  treated  as  children  first  and  foremost, 
following children rights legislation, and they need to be prioritised in settlement and integration 
efforts. 

Cyber security 
Attacks  on  public  and  private  cyber  infrastructure  or  on  the  electric  grid  can  have  severe 
consequences, considering how integrated our systems are already. The EU network is as strong 
as  its  weakest  link:  if  one  of  the  poorly  protected  networks  is  infiltrated,  it  will  spread  to  all. 
Cyberthreats against our societies and infrastructure could come from state- as well as non-state 
actors  which  makes  it  difficult  to  decide  whether  to  treat  it  as  a  military  or  civilian  security 
operation. Cybercrimes should be included and punishable in international law. 

It is concerning to see that often  almost half or more of the staff working in cybersecurity are 
external contractors, which means they are not really under control and command of government. 
It is worth wondering if these external companies abide by the same values and ethics as military 
and government personnel are obliged to consider and whether their loyalties may be divided. A 
possible solution for this issue could be like the one Estonia18 is practicing. ECPM proposes that 
each EU Member State has its own cyber unit, and that they are all interconnected.  

Anti-terrorism 
The ECPM has consistently affirmed that terrorism can only be dealt with effectively if addressed 
at  its  roots.  Ultimately  any  form  of  terrorism  starts  with  extremist  ideology  that  encourages 
violence  as  a  means  to  achieve  political  goals.  This  ideology  thrives  in  a  low-education,  low-
information environment that is permissive towards this type of extremism. This demonstrates 
the need to promote both at home and abroad a culture based on human dignity and fundamental 
freedoms  and  which  centres  on  education.  The  fight  against  terrorism  in  Europe  cannot  be 
disconnected from foreign policy and the need to set new priorities there as well. 

We call for an urgent reassessment of all aid programs and other support given to entities outside 
the EU and to ensure that no funding ends up in the hands of extremists. European presence via 
‘front organisations’ of entities which support extremist groups/ ideology needs to  end. Closer 
supervision of the spending of European funds and periodical review are necessary. 

All existing EU level structures that work on counterterrorism should get the funding and support 
that  will  enable  them  to  cooperate  more  effectively  with  the  Member  States  where  needed. 

18 https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/estonia/11564163/Estonia-recruits-volunteer-army-of-
cyber-warriors.html  

18 

 
 
Special attention should be given to cooperation with Member States regarding visa applications 
if there is any reason for concern that Europe’s security might be affected. Effective cross-border 
training of civil servants and officers in police and justice departments should be increased. An 
effective  exchange  between  EU  Member  States  of  data  regarding  terror  suspects,  or  those  in 
connection with them, as well as extremist actors, is a clear priority. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
FIGHTING MODERN SLAVERY 

Summary 

•  We condemn and fight any form of modern slavery which dehumanizes people and 

reduces them to commodities. 

•  We advocate for due diligence in business practices (i.e. ensuring forced labour was 
not used at any point in the supply chain) and for consumers to choose companies 
vetted for their fair and sustainable practice. 

•  We support the Nordic Model as a means of fighting sexual exploitation and 

encourage Member States to adopt legislation criminalizing the buyers of sex services 
and the traffickers. We urge governments to increase prosecution rates of traffickers, 
to develop nation-wide prevention and awareness campaigns and to work with NGOs 
in crafting robust exit programmes + legal assistance for victims. 

Modern slavery is a dehumanizing act that reduces people to trading objects and violates their 
dignity.  It  distorts  relationships  and  severely  hurts  people,  making  it  a  difficult  process  to  re-
establish new healthy ones. Most of the victims are used for sexual exploitation and forced labour. 
Since human trafficking is a cross-border crime, combating it requires international cooperation. 
ECPM strongly favours the Nordic model that decriminalizes the victim and criminalizes the client 
and the trafficker as the most effective way to stop human trafficking and (forced) prostitution. 
Human trafficking is the fastest growing criminal industry in the world: an estimated 50 million 
people around the world were victims of modern slavery in 2021 according to the global estimates 
of the International Labour Organization, of which almost 28 million were in forced labour and the 
other 22 million in forced marriage.19 

FORCED LABOUR 
Out of the 27.6 million people trapped in forced labour, 17.3 million are exploited in the private 
sector,  6.3  million  in  forced  commercial  sexual  exploitation,  and  3.9  million  in  forced  labour 
imposed by state. Forced labour is prevalent in agricultural work, the hospitality industry, in the 
garment industry, and in domestic work (nanny, au-pair). Most likely we have all eaten food or 
have in our possession clothes that have been produced by enslaved workers.  

In Europe we notice a phenomenon of people from Eastern Europe travelling for work to the richer 
countries and being exploited (domestic, agricultural and construction workers in particular). An 
adopted  report  (2017)20  in  the  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (PACE) 
highlighted  the  issue  of  domestic  workers  in  Western  Europe.  The  problematic  conditions  are 
exacerbated by differences in the legislation of Member States and the absence of a European-
wide  regulation  on  the  matter.  They  often  must  work  long  hours  for  low  wages  and  live  in 
unsuitable  conditions.  Those  who  come  from  countries  outside  the  EU  are  in  an  even  worse 
situation because of restrictive sponsor-based immigration policies which link their visas to their 
employers. As a result, employers control the workers’ immigration status and ability to change 
jobs,  and  sometimes  whether  the  worker  can  return  home.  The  record  number  of  refugees 
pouring  into  Europe  (Ukrainians,  most  recently,  and  from  Middle  East  eight  years  ago)  are  in 
danger of exploitation by traffickers, children being particularly vulnerable.  

ECPM believes that the efforts to prevent and combat forced labour should be aimed at all parts 
of the supply chain, especially in those sectors that have a high risk of exploitation. All companies, 

19 https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labour/lang--en/index.htm  
20 https://pace.coe.int/en/files/23682  

20 

 
 
 
 
regardless of whether they operate in one European country or transnationally and regardless of 
where the abuse takes place, should be held accountable in line with the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights.21 In cooperation with the Member States, the EU could compile a list 
of companies which do not comply with legislation against forced labour. If their non-compliance 
is systematic, then they could face an EU-wide ban in the trading of their goods.  

At  EU  level,  the  proposed  Directive  on  Corporate  Sustainability  Due  Diligence22  should  be 
strengthened to include downstream companies as well. EU large companies (SMEs are excluded) 
would  be  required  to  obtain  contractual  assurances  from  direct  and  indirect  partners  that  no 
forced labour was used in the supply chain. The contractual assurances must be accompanied by 
appropriate measures to verify compliance. The EU should also set up a platform  and coordinate 
the international exchange and cooperation based on ILO and Council of Europe expertise, with a 
view to sharing best practices to ensure decent work for domestic workers.  

On the issue of domestic workers from  Eastern European countries, EU Member States should 
work  towards  developing  affordable  and  easily  accessible  complaint  mechanisms,  taking  into 
consideration the needs of the domestic workers. Moreover, incentives and simplified procedures 
must  be  put  in  place  for  households  which  will  enable  them  to  formalize  the  employment  of 
domestic  workers.  An  example  can  be  the  employment  cheques  that  have  already  been 
introduced in several Member States. 

SEXUAL EXPLOITATION 
According to the fourth European Commission report23 (2022) on the progress made in the fight 
against  trafficking  in  human  beings,  sexual  exploitation  continues  to  be  the  most  prevalent 
purpose behind trafficking in the EU. Nearly three quarters of all victims in the EU were female 
(women and girls), predominantly trafficked for sexual exploitation. The United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime Global Report on Trafficking in Persons published in 202024 confirms the findings 
of the Commission report at a global scale.  

There  are  different  legislative  approaches  to  prostitution  across  Europe.  In  some  European 
countries, prostitution is legalised and regulated (Austria, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Latvia and 
Netherlands), while in others it is legal but unregulated (Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Italy, Luxemburg, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain).  
A second model is prohibition, either by punishing the prostitute (Croatia, Romania), punishing 
the client (France, Ireland, Sweden) or both (Lithuania).25 The model practiced in France, Ireland 
and Sweden makes purchasing sexual services illegal, but there are protection measures in place 
for those who sell the services; this is called the Nordic Model and it is an approach which ECPM 
sees as beneficial. We base our position on long-term studies and data analysis from countries 
which decriminalized prostitution (The Netherlands, Germany) and which showed that (1) women 
continued to be at risk and in unsafe situations26 and (2) human trafficking increased.27 On the 
other hand, the countries that followed the Nordic Model (Sweden28) witnessed a decrease in the 

21www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf  
22 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_1145  
23 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52022DC0736  
24 https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/glotip-2020.html  
25https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2021/695394/IPOL_STU(2021)695394_EN.pdf  
26 https://endsexualexploitation.org/articles/the-failure-of-legalization-of-prostitution-in-the-netherlands/ ; 
https://www.cahrv.uni-osnabrueck.de/reddot/BroschuereProstGenglisch.pdf 
27https://eprints.lse.ac.uk/45198/1/Neumayer_Legalized_Prostitution_Increase_2012.pdf  
28https://childhub.org/sites/default/files/library/attachments/1049_swedish_prostitution_summary_original.pdf  

21 

 
 
demand for sexual services over a decade and the legislation was acting as a deterrent to human 
traffickers. 

We welcome and support the recent report adopted by the European Parliament in September 
202329 which highlights some positive results from the implementation of the Nordic Model and 
admits at the same time that this approach “is not a fix-all solution to reduce demand”. It also 
brought up the insufficient budgeting for exit programmes which in some countries (e.g. France) 
increases the dangers for the persons trapped in prostitution and makes it harder to get out. We 
call on the Member States governments and public agencies to engage all actors in civil society 
and make establishing robust, well-funded exit programmes a priority.  

The PACE report30 adopted in 2014 called “Prostitution, trafficking and modern slavery in Europe”, 
in addition to supporting the Nordic Model, exit programmes and comprehensive legal assistance, 
also called for the banning of sexual services ads, including forms of disguised advertising. We fully 
support  the  report  and  call  on  the  EU  Member  States  to  adopt  and  implement  its 
recommendations. 

The most important piece of legislation continues to be the 2011/36/EU Directive on Preventing 
and Combating Trafficking in Human Beings.31 The Directive requires Member States to criminalize 
the use of sexual services if there is knowledge that the person is a victim of human trafficking. In 
December  2022,  the  European  Commission  published  a  proposal  for  a  revision32  of  the  2011 
Directive that will have to be approved by the Parliament and the Council. The updated wording 
calls Member States to make it a criminal offence using sex services provided by exploited persons. 
We welcome the updated wording and urge Member States to implement it.  

Additionally, we encourage Member States to intensify awareness programs through media and 
in schools and work on eliminating stigma and shame for victims.  

Finally,  Member  States  should  strengthen  existing  frameworks  for  identifying  and  referring 
potential  victims  of  trafficking  and  ensure  they  get  the  needed  support  (National  Referral 
Mechanisms) in accordance with the recommendations33 of the OSCE and the EU Anti-Trafficking 
Directive.  

29 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9-2023-0328_EN.html  
30https://pace.coe.int/pdf/87d846fdefbe14cf7cdd6b0e5df435981c4734e623d9cc6d3957000e53bcc386/res.%201983.
pdf  
31 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:101:0001:0011:en:PDF  
32 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52022PC0732  
33 https://www.osce.org/odihr/510014  

22 

 
 
 
 
REFORMING THE EUROPEAN UNION 

Summary 

•  ECPM calls for the European Union to reduce its directive role  and to act more  as a 
facilitator between strong, sovereign Member States. We wish to see a reduction of the 
bureaucracy and the elimination of redundant or wasteful agencies. 

•  We  reject  uniformity  and  turning  the  EU  into  a  superstate;  instead,  we  propose  a 

confederal model. 

ECPM sees the EU as an instrument of peace, like the founding fathers envisioned it (see Treaty 
of Paris).34 As such, we stand firmly for the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in the EU treaties; 
we  believe  the  EU  institutions  should  maintain  a  coordinating  role,  while  the  national 
governments enjoy full power of decision on matters of national competence.  

ROLE OF THE EU 
We  believe  that  a  European  Union  that  is  less  directive  and  more  facilitating  will  be  more 
beneficial  for  EU  citizens  and  will  form  an  effective  narrative  against  destructive  far-right 
sentiments. To many, the EU has grabbed power and authority which does not belong to it and 
has been using that power to impose its will and ideology on the Member States. ECPM is critical 
of  the  European  Commission’s  right  of  initiative,  which  leads  to  imposing  Regulations  and 
Directives on Member  States  by unelected bureaucrats, legislation acts which often  go further 
than the founding treaties intended. We also advocate for longer debate times in the European 
Parliament on important issues, to ensure that the citizens’ representatives can truly influence 
the legislative process. ECPM suggests periodically reviewing EU Directives and Regulations and 
deciding if they need to be continued, amended, or removed; redundant or ineffective legislation 
should  be  discarded.  Likewise,  European  entities  or  agencies  that  have  no  added  value  and 
operate outside the EU competencies or infringe on national competences should be eliminated. 
Criteria for European agencies should be subsidiarity, economics, and pan-European cooperation. 
In  general,  ECPM  wants  more  transparency  on  how  the  EU  Budgets  are  spent  on  projects  in 
Member States since, too often, gross misspending comes to light.  

ECPM acknowledges the EU’s significant role in combating money laundering and tax evasion. We 
see a clear role for the EU preventing multinationals from pitting one EU Member State against 
another. Transparent and fair rules, as well as rigorous monitoring by the EU institutions, are key.  

REPRESENTATION OF CITIZENS IN THE EU 
We  advocate  for  sovereign  and  empowered  Member  States  and  for  the  European  Union 
institutions to strictly adhere to the principle of subsidiarity. We believe more control should be 
returned  to  national  parliaments,  which  would  also  increase  their  responsibility.  The  citizens 
would  feel  less  sceptical  of  Brussels  if  they  felt  their  representatives  and  governments  have  a 
bigger role and that decision-making is closer to them.  The ECPM is committed to strengthening 
the role of the European Parliament as the direct and most proportionate elected representation 
of the European citizens. 

34 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:11951K:EN:PDF  

23 

 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the ECPM supports the Spitzenkandidat process and avails of its right to nominate 
a candidate for the 2024 European parliamentary elections. By nominating a candidate, ECPM is 
committed  to  present  its  values  and  programme  to  the  European  citizens  and  to  support  the 
campaign of its member parties across Europe. 

A NEW MODEL 
ECPM, together with Sallux, promotes a “confederal Europe which is neither a withdrawal from 
the European project nor a headlong and premature rush towards full political integration”.35 The 
Member States’ diverse economies and the various groupings to which they belong (Schengen, 
banking union, Eurozone etc.) make one-size-fits-all solutions untenable. Efforts for uniformity are 
misplaced and risky.  Instead, we propose  a model which would offer more flexibility.  Member 
States could act more effectively together on issues of economic divergence if their economies 
are more similar and their preferences not adversative. States forming smaller groups around an 
issue, a priority or common background- like the Visegrad 4, the Benelux or the Baltic Group- could 
be an example of better cooperation.  

Regarding EU expansion, we affirm that only countries which fully comply with the Copenhagen 
criteria36 can become members of the EU. Forms of partnerships can be explored with other third-
party countries, as long as human rights and fundamental freedoms are respected. We are firmly 
opposed to Turkey becoming part of the EU, as it is increasingly failing to meet the political criteria, 
such as respect for human rights, the rule of law, democracy, and the protection of minorities.  

35 https://sallux.eu/products/confederal-europe.html  
36 https://neighbourhood-enlargement.ec.europa.eu/enlargement-policy/glossary/accession-criteria_en  

24 

 
 
 
 
HONOURING EU’S CHRISTIAN ROOTS 

Summary 

•  The ECPM believes that the Christian values- freedom, truth, solidarity, human dignity- 
which were at the root of founding the European Union need to be acknowledged and 
appreciated; they are still relevant and useful today. 

•  We  stand  for  the  freedom  of  religion  or  belief  of  all  people,  including  the  right  to 
worship publicly, wear religious symbols and teach their children in the faith. We stand 
with the hundreds of millions of persecuted Christians around the world and advocate 
for their right to participate fully in public life. 

•  We advocate for respect for FoRB to be added as a priority in foreign affairs and for the 

role of the Special Envoy to be strengthened. 

•  ECPM  condemns  the  increase  in  discrimination  and  violations  of  the  freedom  of 
conscience of Christians in Europe and the lack of reasonable accommodations or space 
for conscientious objection. 

We  believe  key  teachings  of  Christianity  such  as  freedom,  love,  truth,  reconciliation,  human 
dignity and solidarity are relevant, useful concepts for today’s society. Behind our justice systems, 
behind the fundamental rights and freedoms we value greatly in Europe are Jesus’ teachings, are 
God’s ideas of Good and Evil. We value life because we see it as God-given; we love our neighbour 
and defend her/his freedom of expression (even if we might disagree) because we believe we are 
created  by  God,  in  His  likeness.  We  believe  in  debating  ideas  and  respecting  our  political 
opponents.  Our Christian faith informs our views, our decisions and political direction; and we 
believe it inspired the founding fathers of the European project as well. It is something the EU 
should recognize and be proud of. There is a plurality of faiths and beliefs in Europe now and for 
it to remain a rich and peaceful place, everyone needs to respect the other’s faith and point of 
view. We are weary of secular anti-religious ideologies which want to erase the legacy of Christian 
thinking and play down its relevance.  

FREEDOM OF RELIGION OR BELIEF 
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion is the right to hold religious beliefs, to change them 
or abandon them freely, to promote and express them openly, and to expect the state to protect 
individuals as they exercise their rights. Freedom of religion also includes the liberty to manifest 
one’s religion or belief in teaching, worship, and observance. It includes parents’ rights to pass 
their religious or moral education to their children and also the right to establish and maintain 
institutions that operate on a distinct ethos. Freedom of religion or belief is enshrined not only in 
Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 18 of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights, but also in many national, international, and European instruments.37 

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AROUND THE WORLD  
There are worrying trends and many threats to freedom of religion or belief around the world. 
Today, more than 360 million Christians suffer high levels of persecution and discrimination for 
their  faith.  The  latest  report  by  Open Doors  International  shows  that  globally  1  in 7 Christians 
experiences high levels of persecution or discrimination. In Africa, this figure is 1 in 5, in Asia it is 
2 in 5, and in Latin America 1 in 15.38 Various resolutions and reports in the European Parliament 

37www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Religion/RapporteursDigestFreedomReligionBelief.pdf  
38 https://www.opendoors.org/en-US/persecution/countries/  

25 

 
 
 
 
and  the  PACE  condemned  the  persecution  and  killing  of  Christians  by  terrorist  groups  such  as 
ISIS.39 

In  addition  to  Christians,  members  of  all  major  world  religions  face  discrimination  and 
persecution.40 ECPM believes that we should promote Freedom of Religion or Belief as a right for 
everyone regardless of their religious beliefs. This applies to believers of all religions provided that 
they also in turn respect religious plurality and the right of all individuals to choose a religious 
belief, but also no religion at all.  

Following pressure from the European Parliament and civil society, the Council of the EU adopted 
in 2013 several guidelines41 on the promotion and protection of Freedom of Religion or Belief. In 
these  guidelines,  the  Council  of  the  EU  recognized  that  protection  of  FoRB  contributes  to 
“democracy, rule of law, development, peace and stability”. It also indicated that religious violence 
or obstacles to freedom of religion were often an early indicator of potential conflict. Although 
these  guidelines  were  a  positive  step,  their  implementation  and  evaluation  are  missing,  as 
emphasized by the European Parliament Intergroup on Freedom of Religion or Belief and Religious 
Tolerance  in  their  latest  report.42  ECPM  supports  the  guidelines  and  insists  on  their  proper 
implementation and evaluation. 

Another step the EU institutions took was to create the post of Special Envoy for the promotion 
and protection of freedom of religion or belief outside the European Union. When empowered 
and  properly  funded,  we  believe  this  role  can  be  used  to  yield  tangible  results  (e.g.:  positive 
influence  in  the  case  of  Asia  Bibi)  and  to  show  EU’s  commitment  to  peaceful  coexistence  and 
religious pluralism. We ask that the European Commission strengthen the mandate of the Special 
Envoy, as it was stressed by a European Parliament resolution adopted in January 2019.43  

FREEDOM OF RELIGION IN EUROPE 
At the same time, there are many challenges to Freedom of Religion or Belief as well as Freedom 
of Conscience within Europe. In the past few years, the EU attempted to widen the scope of the 
anti-discrimination legislation outside the labour market in a proposal for a Council Directive on 
“implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of religion or belief, 
disability, age or sexual orientation”44 that is currently blocked in the Council. The draft Directive 
uses vague terms open to interpretation, widens the scope of application, and reverses the burden 
of  proof  from  accuser  to  accused.  The  Directive  would  also  have  implications  on  freedom  of 
conscience,  since  it  would  prohibit  business  owners  to  refuse  providing  goods  and  services  to 
people when that violates their beliefs. 

The PACE resolution on “Tackling Intolerance and Discrimination in Europe with a special focus on 
Christians”45  noted  that  intolerance  and  discrimination  on  grounds  of  religion  or  belief  affect 

39 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-8-2014-0027_EN.html, 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-8-2016-0051_EN.html, 
https://pace.coe.int/en/files/12626#trace-1,  https://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-
en.asp?fileid=24014&lang=en,  
40 https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/2020/11/10/harassment-of-religious-groups-continues-to-be-reported-in-
more-than-90-of-countries/  
41 www.eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/files/137585.pdf  
42 https://www.religiousfreedom.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Intergroup-FoRB-Report-Final-2021.pdf  
43 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-8-2019-0013_EN.html  
44 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/legislative-train/theme-area-of-justice-and-fundamental-rights/file-anti-
discrimination-directive  
45 http://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-EN.asp?fileid=21549&lang=en  

26 

 
 
 
minority  religious  groups  in  Europe,  but  also  people  belonging  to  majority  religious  groups. 
Christians  in  Europe  are  sometimes  harassed,  intimidated or  fired  for  publicly  expressing their 
faith  and  religious  values.46  The  resolution  calls  for  European  states  to  “promote  reasonable 
accommodation so as to enable Christians to fully participate in public life”. 

 In  other  instances, the  right  of parents to opt  their child out of individual classes or an entire 
course  which  the  parents deem  contrary  to  their  religious  beliefs  was  limited, despite  it  being 
enshrined  in  Article 18  of the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and Political Rights,  as well  as  in 
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. An older PACE resolution47 mentioned the 
cases where children belonging to religious minorities have been taken away by child protection 
agencies.  

ECPM  also  stands  with  doctors  who  refuse  to  perform  abortions  and  affirms  their  right  to 
conscientious objection and reasonable accommodation. The state has an obligation to respect 
the freedom of conscience as it is a right enshrined in international and European Human Rights 
law. The conscientious objection of medical staff was also reiterated in the PACE report on “The 
right to conscientious objection in lawful medical care”.48  

46 https://www.christianpost.com/news/mp-pivi-rsnen-facing-second-trial-over-biblical-beliefs.html ; 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/15/landmark-victory-ba-cross-work 
47 https://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-en.asp?fileid=23719  
48 https://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-en.asp?fileid=17909  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
