1. Preserving National Identity: Reforming the European Union and Safeguarding Member
State Sovereignty

Europe's freedom and prosperity are based on values and national cultures that have
developed over centuries. The guarantors of this are the nation states and their national
democracies. That is why we in the ECR Party will do everything we can to protect Europe's
cherished traditions, freedoms and values and this is why we call for a reform for a European
Union. We believe that the EU should do less but better. We will reject any unnecessary
centralisation of power in Brussels, as decisions should be made as close to the people as
possible. We oppose any attempt to further centralise the EU and the extension of qualified
majority voting in areas from which it is currently excluded. The role of the European
Commission should not be mistaken for a government of a European super-state. In order to
guarantee flexibility and efficiency we propose to use provisions already laid out in the
Treaties. We pledge to usher in a new era of empowered sovereignty for our Member States
by leveraging EU Treaty requirements
the principles of subsidiarity and
proportionality. When wielded effectively, these principles fortify our decision-making
processes and uphold the integrity of our national democracies, allowing us to embrace the
diverse tapestry of cultures, economies, histories, and opinions that define us

such as

2. Safeguarding Our Citizens: A Strong Defence, United Front

We will fortify Europe's defence industry, engaging directly with armed forces and leveraging
EU resources. Standing firmly with Ukraine against Russian aggression, we will work to
increase aid and ensure that sanctions are effective, empowering nations that are being
oppressed through active support. We are committed to enhancing EU-NATO cooperation by
boosting defence budgets, advancing technology, and training forces. We will strive to affirm
NATO as the primary security actor. Our objective is to ensure swift EU action to protect
citizens and to combat cross-border terrorism. We will also strengthen transatlantic relations
and collaborate with partners in North and South America to champion democracy, uphold
the rule of law, and promote-conservative values on the global stage. Together, we will work
towards a safer and more secure future for all. We want to strengthen Europe's defence,
technology, and industrial base to ensure the development and production of a full range of
military capabilities in sufficient quantities and on short notice for both Member States and
their allies. However, we believe that defence and military preparedness should remain the
prerogative of the Member States. Therefore, we are highly sceptical about the creation of a
defence union at the EU level.    

3. Securing Our Borders: A Comprehensive Migration Strategy

The EU must help Member States manage migratory flows and not force their citizens to
welcome illegal immigrants without their consent. We propose a comprehensive strategy for
border security that covers all possible points of entry, including air, land, and sea borders.
This strategy requires enhanced border infrastructure financed by all Member States and
proactive measures to address the root causes of migration. We will combat human
trafficking and smuggling,
increase repatriations, establish regional platforms, and
collaborate with third countries on the externalisation of migration management. Our
objective is to ensure that the majority of applications for international protection are

assessed directly outside of the EU. We also want to block illegal departures through
common naval missions. We will also work to counter and prevent the exploitation of
migrant flows as a hybrid weapon by Eastern and Southern neighbours, aimed at
destabilising and heightening tensions within the EU. To prevent abuse of the asylum system,
insist on granting asylum only to genuine refugees. We are also committed to
we will
reinforcing agencies like Frontex and Europol to help Member States fortify our external
borders. With strong external borders, we can better ensure the safety and security of our
own citizens, but also those who legitimately seek protection within our borders. Internally,
we must emphasise the importance of effective integration that respects and upholds
European values and ways of life.

4. Harvesting Tomorrow: Sustainable Farming and Fishing for a Better Future

Our farmers are the backbone of our communities, and we stand by them. Therefore, we
must harness the power of science to drive policies in agriculture and reject unfettered green
ideology. We advocate for a balanced approach that respects the vital role of our farmers
while advancing sustainability initiatives. We are resolutely committed to conducting a
thorough review of both the current Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and the ’Farm to
Fork‘ strategy. We have had enough of the bureaucracy of the CAP and will make efficiency
our top priority. We aim to promote environmental and social sustainability while supporting
our farmers, their families, and rural communities. As an ally of farmers and fishermen, we
will demand fair policies for EU enlargement, while protecting our products by adopting
further initiatives against unfair practices and championing the exclusive status of EU
geographical
indications. We are committed to achieving food sovereignty and making
quality food accessible to all European citizens at affordable prices. Our commitment to
advocating for globally comparable fishing practices and regulations is resolute, and we will
insist that all fishermen are on a level playing field, free from any regulatory disadvantage.
With the ECR, you can be sure we are putting our farmers, fishermen and communities first.

5. Revising the Green Deal: Balancing Climate Action and Prosperity

The global challenge of climate change and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions can
only be tackled globally and in a market economy.
We propose an opposite approach on the Green Deal to that promoted by the EU in the last
five years. We will advocate a more balanced, localised climate strategy that does not forget
ordinary people and prioritises
socio-economic well-being. We will prioritise the
implementation of existing legislative requirements, and securing the required funding to do
so before considering any new regulations. We are intent on protecting citizens, farmers and
businesses from the negative impacts of the current over-ideological green climate policy.
We intend to review the more problematic objectives of the Green Deal. We promote 'real'
sustainability for our economies that leaves no one behind, revitalising Europe's core
industrial sectors and enabling a just transition with support for those affected. Crucially, we
will support research and technological innovation and propose strategies in agreement with
companies and not against them. We stand firm in our belief that the internal combustion
engine, a testament to the power of European creativity and ingenuity, can remain
commercially viable for years to come by embracing cutting-edge technology and investing in
ground-breaking research on alternative low-emission fuels.

6. Igniting Economic Growth: Unleashing the Potential of the Single Market and Europe's
Small Businesses

Our primary objective in the economic sphere is to revitalise industrial policy and reinforce
the Single Market. Unreasonable objectives, misplaced priorities, and impractical rules have
led to a significant loss of competitiveness and the de-industrialisation of our continent. We
vow to ignite economic growth in the EU by slashing red tape and ensuring regulations bring
tangible benefits, fostering a level playing field in state aid and simplifying the service
market. We are committed to empowering small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) by
cutting down on unnecessary red tape, calling for a temporary halt on new EU rules for small
instead directing resources towards implementing and enforcing existing
businesses,
legislation, and modernising the EU's digital landscape to spur innovation and investment in
cutting-edge technologies like AI, 5G/6G, and quantum computing. We will strive for a
regulatory framework that fosters healthy competition and entrepreneurship, championing
the freedom of enterprise for every citizen while preserving Member States' fiscal autonomy
and non-interference in tax issues. Every citizen should have the freedom to pursue
enterprise, and we will champion this cause by creating a conducive environment for SMEs
to thrive. We also want to safeguard and advance our unique identity in a globalised world
by preserving and promoting traditional artisanal skills and methods.

7. Energise and Innovate: Lighting the Path to a Resilient Future!

We are unapologetically committed to revolutionising energy security and driving innovation
that sets the stage ablaze. We want to strengthen the autonomy of the EU by paying
particular attention to logistics infrastructures, new technologies, and energy and raw
materials supply. Our goal is to bring back strategic productions to Europe, following the
principle of being ’open as possible, as closed as necessary’. Although it is vital to emphasise
the importance of each Member State's autonomy in determining their own energy mix, we
strongly advocate for a technology neutral approach that champions nuclear energy and
makes us a trailblazer in geothermal power. This approach will enable us to maintain a
competitive edge in the energy sector, as well as promote energy security and sustainability.
We will drive research and innovation, fuelling strategic investments in top-tier transport
infrastructure. With an emphasis on turbocharging EU connectivity, we will work to connect
all regions of the EU, unlocking unprecedented opportunities for growth and development.
In addition, we are rallying European research efforts and welcoming European technologies
into the common market with open arms. We are -focused on swiftly turning inventions into
tangible European products and companies. With us, there are no sunk costs – only a
flourishing and innovative European budget that is guaranteed to deliver.

8. Driving global economic growth: A Bold Vision for Trade

Our vision is bold and grounded in liberal-conservative principles. We see a future where the
European Union thrives on free trade, propelling us into an unprecedented era of economic
Imagine a world where market-led prosperity, shattered trade barriers, and
growth.
rock-solid agreements that uphold intellectual property, ethical
labour, and sustainable
standards are the norm. We will strive for rules-based, mutually beneficial engagement to

unleash our economic potential and advocate for comprehensive trade relations with a wide
range of partners in order to diversify our trade relations, reduce our over dependencies and
build a resilient supply chain mix, while addressing unfair trade practices with finesse. We
will prioritise de-risking and adopt a firm approach in our relationship with China. We will
also seek to reform the World Trade Organization (WTO), and foster dynamic partnerships
with strategic allies, such as the United States, the United Kingdom and in Latin America as
well as the Indo-Pacific Region to propel global growth.

9. Smart Spending, Smart Future: Revolutionising the 21st Century EU Budget!

The EU budget is crucial for the functioning of the EU. That is why we are committed to
reforming it to make it more efficient and effective. We will reshape the budget without
requiring new own resources. We will also prioritise performance-based budgeting, which
means every Euro spent will achieve more. We also value transparency and rigorous scrutiny,
meaning we will stop at nothing until every action is accounted for. With our approach, we
bid farewell to excess and usher in a new era of precision budgeting, where every Euro is
spent wisely and with maximum impact.

10. Charting Europe's Course: Strengthening Global Security and considering further
enlargement in the new geopolitical environment

The ECR will consider further EU enlargement to strategically important countries, based on
merit and compliance with the Copenhagen criteria. Nonetheless, it is crucial that the EU
does not exploit this opportunity to expand its powers, and we will categorically reject any
automatic deepening of EU political integration as a direct result of enlargement. We will
look to strengthen ties between the EU, the Global West, and the UK, particularly in security
and defence cooperation, intelligence sharing, energy, migration and other policy areas. In
navigating relations with China, the ECR takes a nuanced stance, recognising both the need
for engagement and the imperative to address human rights violations, while advocating for
stronger ties with Taiwan and other like-minded partners in the Pacific region. We will
advocate for a more assertive policy towards Iran, focusing on its nuclear programs and
state-sponsored terrorism. We will prioritise the protection of persecuted Christians
worldwide and defend religious freedom. Our approach to promoting our common interest is
nuanced, our commitment unwavering, and our actions will speak louder than words.

