REINVENTING
Europe

2024 MANIFESTo

2024 MANIFEST0

Foreword by the President

Introduction by the Secretary-General

The Manifesto

The Priority Actions

6

11
19

23
47

71
 9

Table of Contents

a)
b)

c)
d)

Convergence & Strengthening
DEMOCRACY AND GOVERNANCE - GLOBAL POWER EUROPE - 
CONSOLIDATION AND AUTONOMY - FUNDING COMMON PUBLIC GOODS - 
COHESION AND EQUITY - DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION - REFORMING THE 
EURO ZONE

Global Renaissance
MIGRATION FLOWS - GREEN AND BLUE LEADERSHIP - ENHANCED HEALTHCARE 
- FOOD SOVEREIGNTY - DIGITAL REVOLUTION - 450 MILLION CONSUMERS

Plural Harmony
EQUITABLE GROWTH - THE FUTURE OF YOUTH - QUALITY EDUCATION 
FOR ALL - CULTURAL WEALTH AND DIVERSITY - MEDIA AND 
PLURALISM - SPORT AND ETHICS

Vibrant Regions 
REGIONAL PROGRESS AND PROSPERITY - 
THRIVING OUTERMOST REGIONS

4

5

François
Bayrou

The world is at a turning point. Never since the end 
of the Cold War has the future seemed so dark and 
dangerous.  War  has  returned  to  our  continent,  the 
world’s  major  powers  seeking  to  control  technology 
and whole  economies,  the  calamitous  effects  of  cli-
mate  change  are  manifest,  the  global  order  is  beset 
with  ever-growing  threats. The  tight-knit  alliance  of 
the medium powers of Europe, joined in political inte-
gration, provides the only effective protection for our 
fellow citizens and for future generations.

The European Union was built piece by piece from the 
rubble of the Second World War, a disaster so terrible 
and  so unprecedented  in previous centuries and mil-
lennia that our continent was almost unable to recover.

Strong pioneering spirits – Jean Monnet, Robert Schuman, Alcide De Gasperi, Konrad Adenauer, 
Paul-Henri Spaak and, more recently, Altiero Spinelli, Jacques Delors and Bronislaw Geremek – 
brought the peoples of Europe together because they were convinced that helping each other, 
solidarity and shared interests would triumph over old feuds. We are their heirs and must cham-
pion this heritage. In shaping the Europe of tomorrow, it is our duty to show the same sense of 
history.

The very fabric of our democracies is being called into question by a series of violent upheavals. 
Russia’s  war  on  Ukraine  is  a  crime  against  history.  Driven  by  his  desire  to  subjugate  Ukraine, 
Vladimir Putin has broken a taboo and taken the senseless risk of wreaking havoc by breaching 
the bedrock of international law and one of the EU’s founding principles: the intangibility of na-
tional borders. His rule has all the hallmarks of the most cynical dictatorship as he strikes down 
any who dare oppose him. In perpetrating the no less cynical terrorist attack of 7 October, Hamas 
succeeded in setting the Middle East ablaze, with considerable loss of life and dire consequences 
for international security. In China, demographic collapse is being used as a pretext for economic, 
technological  and  commercial  overexpansion  and  for  its  imperialist  threats  directed  at Taiwan. 
Locked in a divisive standoff pitting one side of public opinion against the other, the United States 

threatens to return to brutal technological domination and turning its back on its allies, particular-
ly those in Europe. All over the world, democracy is under attack, undermined by authoritarianism 
and populism.

This new era is affecting European society. The resulting inflation crisis is destabilising the already 
weakened  social  equilibrium. The  far  right  is  on  the  brink  of  power  in  many  countries,  adding 
fuel to our darkest fears. Traditional parties are falling apart and the dark clouds of populism are 
threatening democracies caught up in a crisis of representation.

 Since our party was created, twenty years ago, the list of challenges has grown longer. And yet 
we have always been pragmatic in adapting our way of thinking. We have drawn lessons from 
the global financial crisis that had such a dramatic impact on so many citizens and highlighted 
Europe’s growing economic inequality. Similarly, we have learned from the pandemic and from 
controversies  related  to  our  borders. These  challenges  have  revealed  weaknesses  such  as  our 
perilous dependence upon manufacturing centres beyond our control.

2024 will therefore be a pivotal year. For the first time, we are not going into the European elec-
tions  on  the  defensive.  No-one  can  convincingly  make  the  case  that  the  role  of  the  European 
Union in defending who we are and what we hold dear is anything less than vital.

On the eve of the 2024 European elections, we must reaffirm the crucial importance of European 
political integration. Reinventing Europe is an arduous task that requires unshakable will, and that 
is our foremost quality. We must shape the future of Europe so that justice, unity and common 
values shine through.

We the Democrats are determined to promote inclusiveness, solidarity and prosperity through di-
alogue with all European citizens. Their concerns will be the focus of our policies because we val-
ue them as partners in power. Our humanist, deeply pro-European voice must reach all who share 
our democratic values: the rule of law, respect for fundamental rights, identity and diversity, the 
promotion of social progress, inclusion, and solidarity between regions, peoples and generations.

We are one family. From Rome to Rotterdam, from Brno to Bilbao, from Ljubljana to Larnaca, from 
Venice to Vilnius, from Madeira to Munich, and from Strasbourg to Santa Cruz de Tenerife, we 
are all driven by reason and faith in building a European Union whose very existence and values 
are now under threat. We know full well that Europe can only survive and thrive if it is “united in 
diversity”. Europe can and must, even beyond its borders, become a beacon of peace and deter-
mination in this troubled world.

6

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sandro 
Gozi

Here are a few words to introduce the method-
ology of this Manifesto, in which a health-relat-
ed proposal is dedicated to our late colleague 
Véronique  Trillet-Lenoir,  an  eminent  doctor 
and respected politician who passed away on 
9 August 2023.
We wanted this Manifesto to be as informative 
as possible so that readers could use our ide-
as according to their areas of interest and, by 
turning  the  pages,  get  to  know  us  better  and 
understand our philosophy.
But  before we  go  any  further,  I would  like  to 
express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  all  our  col-
leagues,  working  groups  and  member  parties 
for their commitment and dedication to this in-
itiative. Without their valuable input, this pro-
cess would not have been possible.

So, how did we come up with this manifesto? 
It consists of two separate elements for greater 
clarity:
•  THE  POLITICAL  MANIFESTO,  which  out-
lines  and  illustrates  the  principles  and values 
of our party,
• THE  (SPECIFIC)  PRIORITY ACTIONS  detail 
the concrete measures to be taken.

Thus,  the  following  pages  show  that  each  of 
the 21 themes I discuss is presented as a dou-
ble-page spread. 
- The left-hand page summarises the broad po-
litical message of the issue in question.
- The right-hand page outlines the priority ac-
tions. 

As you can see, all the proposed actions (right-
hand  page)  start with  an  action verb  to  instil 
the  idea  in  the  reader’s  mind  that  we  are  on 
the move and have the will to move forward.
How  did  we  come  up  with  300  priority  pro-
posals? 
300  may  seem  a  daunting  number,  but  we 
have developed a rigorous process to achieve 
this result, structure our message, and ensure 
that everyone uses the same language.
Under  the  leadership  of  one  or  more  elected 
officials, each working group conducted an in-
depth  analysis  of  the  problems  and  opportu-
nities specific to its field and formulated con-
crete proposals to solve them.

Following a meticulous review of all the work, 
we have drawn up 4 chapters:
Convergence  &  Strengthening  -  Global  Renaissance  - 
Plural Harmony - Vibrant Regions

21 key themes were identified:
Democracy  and  Governance  -  Global  Power  Europe  -  
Consolidation and Autonomy - Funding Common Public 
Goods - Cohesion and Equity - Diversity and Inclusion 
-  Reforming  the  Eurozone  -  Migration  Flows  -  Green 
and Blue Leadership - Enhanced Healthcare - Food Sov-
ereignty  -  Digital  Revolution  -  450  Million  Consumers 
- Equitable Growth - The Future of Youth - Quality Ed-
ucation for All - Cultural Wealth and Diversity - Media 
and Pluralism - Sport and Ethics - Regional Progress and 
Prosperity - Thriving Outermost Regions 

These categories enabled us to sort and group 
all  the  proposals,  considering  their  relevance, 
feasibility  and  impact.  Duplicates  and  similar 
proposals have been identified and grouped un-
der the most appropriate themes. We then ran 
them through a prioritisation process, which re-
sulted in 300 being selected.

/300 OUR PRIORITY 

ACTIONS 
FOR 2024

8

9

Manifesto

10

11

A stronger 
more united 
Europe

At the heart of our democracies lies a fundamental act: the right to vote. During the European 
elections, from the 6th to the 9th of June 2024, we have an unprecedented opportunity to fulfil 
our civic duty by voting. Why is this of such crucial importance?

First, this unique opportunity to choose our MEPs sets us apart from the rest of the world. Thanks 
to direct universal suffrage, we can actively participate in the election of a continental parliament.
In addition, a supranational parliament therefore gives power to every European citizen.

Recognising the importance and significant impact of your vote, our party has a clear and ambi-
tious manifesto presenting our ideas, priorities and measures to defend and promote democratic 
expression, citizen representation and the dissemination of political ideas on a European level.

Our goal is to create a more committed, inclusive and prosperous Europe where citizens are at the 
heart of decision-making. In this period of major societal change, our democracy must reach its 
logical conclusion. We therefore wish to create a Europe where citizens are active partners in po-
litical life. We are committed to bringing the European institutions closer to their citizens and are 
campaigning for them to be able to elect a true President of the European Union, just as they elect 
their mayors; for them to be able to vote directly for European political parties in the same way 
they do at local and national levels. Therefore, the need for a new form of transnational politics 
is inevitable. For us, it is essential to go beyond national borders to choose our representatives in 
the European Parliament. Instead of European elections with 27 national debates, we must focus 
on a truly European debate and politics. This will allow us to face major challenges together, take 
collective decisions and shape our future with more legitimacy and effectiveness.

We are deeply convinced of the intrinsic value of every individual, wherever they may be. Our 
objective is to persuade all those who advocate for a more sovereign, democratic, and humanist 
Europe and those who look to transcend the splits and schisms that populists and nationalists 
exploit to undermine our European values by deepening divisions. The European Union we dream 
of  is  a  place  where  everyone  can  reach  their  full  potential  and  live  their  European  citizenship 
to  the  fullest,  regardless  of  their  gender,  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  or  expression, 

rope, while  prioritising  concrete  and  pragmatic 
action.

We  are  proud  of  the  tangible  results  achieved 
during this legislative term. Although the foun-
dations  on  which  our  society  was  built  have 
revealed  certain  weaknesses  and  highlighted 
the  limits  of  old  assumptions  about  free  trade, 
openness without reciprocity or a certain naive-
ty towards major trade issues, we will be known 
for being at the origin of considerable progress. 
These include the new rule of law conditionali-
ty regulation, which prevents allocating funds to 
those not respecting European values. We have 
also promoted key initiatives such as the Green 
Deal, new laws on digital services and markets, 
COVID-19 vaccines, the Recovery Plan, the Pact 
on  Migration  and  Asylum,  the  introduction  of 
transnational lists and the holding of the Confer-
ence on the Future of Europe. The latter repre-
sented a first in Europe’s history, allowing direct 
citizen participation on a continental scale. 

We firmly believe that European sovereignty and 
strategic autonomy are essential to preserve our 
freedoms, and it is time to define our vision for 
Europe clearly.

We  want  to  fight  for  a  continental  strategy 
adapted  to  new  challenges  and  requirements. 
The  principle  of  living  together  as  Europeans 
must guide us while ensuring our continent’s se-
curity, development and boosting cooperation.

We want a more engaged, 
inclusive and prosperous 
Europe where citizens are at 
the heart of decision-making, 
from their local community to 
the European Union.

age and generation, social origin, ethnic origin 
and nationality, religion or faith, or physical and 
mental ability.

Equality  between  men  and  women  in  the  Eu-
ropean  Union  has  made  significant  progress 
over  recent  decades,  but  there  is  still  a  long 
way to go. We must ensure that men and wom-
en achieve full equality in all aspects of life as 
quickly  as  possible.  We  must  also  eradicate 
gender-based violence, which remains a major 
problem in Europe.

Our  vision  of  a  diverse  society  goes  beyond       
the fight against discrimination: we are fighting 
to build a society where differences are not only 
accepted,  but  celebrated.  Recognition  and  re-
spect for universal human rights are an integral 
part of our European culture, and we will strive 
to remove all obstacles that stand in the way of 
building a fully inclusive society. 

We seek to strengthen this Europe of solutions, 
which will provide real answers and create nu-
merous opportunities for our regions and their 
citizens.

However,  Renew  Europe  did  not  wait  for  this 
deadline to act. Since 2019, our political group 
has become a key player in the European Parlia-
ment. Thanks to our collective intelligence and 
alliances,  with  Emmanuel  Macron’s  leadership, 
we  have  delivered  our  promises  by  revitalising 
the foundations of a dynamic and powerful Eu-

12

13

Together, we can 
shape a better future 
where the values 
of freedom, democra-
cy, equality and 
solidarity are fully 
achieved.
This is why we support the proposal for a Eu-
ropean political community. It’s mission will be 
to  strengthen  the  links  between  the  Member 
States  of  the  European  Union,  the  candidate 
countries  in  the  process  of  joining,  as  well  as 
the  European  countries  that  have  chosen  not 
to be part of our Union. It is essential to ensure 
consistency  of  action  and  promote  a  sense  of 
shared community within this new architecture 
of continental cooperation and security.

In this context, it is evident that the European 
Union, as it currently exists with its institutional 
structure, is not ready to play this new geopo-
litical  role  nor  to  welcome  new  members.  Es-
sential reforms without totems nor taboos are 
necessary to meet these challenges. 

We  must  reorganise  the  European  continent 
and,  to  cite  only  the  main  reforms,  we  must 
establish  a  defence  union  and  an  energy  un-
ion by eliminating the right of veto, facilitating 
the initiatives of peoples and states who wish 
to accelerate their political union, creating new 
own resources and strengthening the European 
Parliament while reducing the number of Com-
missioners.  Reforming  the  treaties  to  achieve 
these essential changes and move forward with 
continental unification is imperative. We must 

aim for a sovereign Europe that will truly allow 
us to regain control of our destiny.

The European Union was designed to strength-
en  the  various  levels  of  governance,  whether 
local, national or supranational, rather than to 
weaken  them.  Our  party’s  approach  is  that  in 
the  same  way  that  cities  strengthen  regions, 
strengthening nations make the European Par-
liament stronger… And vice versa. The goal is to 
promote  upward  and  downward  collaboration 
between  the  different  levels  of  government 
and democracy, thus creating a more solid and 
effective  structure.  We  will  also  promote  a 
new  cooperation  strategy  between  the  differ-
ent generations for real solidarity between the 
youngest and the oldest.

When we talk about Europe, our commitment 
ranges  from  the  continent  to  the  oceans  and 
to  the  outermost  regions. We  are  determined 
to  place  the  outermost  regions  as  one  of  our 
primary concerns and to give them the recogni-
tion they deserve as regions with solutions and 
of strategic geopolitical importance. These re-
gions are fully part of the European Union, and 
we want  them  to  feel  this  ever  more  strongly 
and urgently.

Our  ambition  is  to  make  Europe  a  beacon  of 
excellence  and  innovation,  focusing  on  the 
well-being of our fellow citizens and building a 
promising future for generations to come. That 
is  why  we  want  to  strengthen  the  protection 
of  citizens,  regain  control  of  our  destiny,  fully 
harness  the  potential  of  artificial  intelligence, 
consolidate  our  common  defence,  responsi-
bly  manage  migration  challenges  and  ensure 
thoughtful climate protection.

The  ecological  transition  must  be  pragmatic 
and  inclusive,  guided  by  technology,  far  from 
ideological  dogmatism  and in no way punitive 
towards  families,  businesses  or  professionals 
in  the  primary  sector,  farmers  and  fishermen. 
It  is  the  European  Union  itself  that  must  take 
charge of this transition. This means reforming 
European  budgets  and  creating  new  financial 

resources, such as a carbon tax at borders. We 
want to promote renewable energies by offer-
ing financial incentives to encourage the tran-
sition  to  a  green  and  blue  economy.  We  will 
actively support companies that develop clean 
technologies, and we will continue our efforts 
to help small and medium-sized enterprises.

For us, the digital, ecological, and maritime tran-
sitions are the essential pillars of our 21st-cen-
tury Europe, just as coal and steel were in the 
past. Our proactive approach pushes us to build 
a resilient, prosperous Europe in harmony with 
our environment. We will support balanced and 
pragmatic policies to reduce carbon emissions, 
promote renewable energy and encourage the 
adoption of cleaner modes of transport.

We are convinced that innovation and research 
will  play  a  crucial  role  in  Europe’s  growth  and 
competitiveness, and we will make massive in-
vestments in cutting-edge technologies, taking 
into account the needs of all generations.

For  us,  artificial  intelligence  represents  an  op-
portunity for humanity, and we  trust it. Moreo-
ver, we will promote the freedom of companies 
and creators in this field because it will create 
jobs  and  facilitate  the  lives  of  children,  stu-
dents, parents, and grandparents. We want to 
promote  a  new  strategy  between  generations 
thanks to artificial intelligence. Artificial intelli-
gence will be the key to the future, and we must 
regain the time we have lost compared to China 
and the United States in this sector. This evo-
lution will take place in full respect of the prin-

The principle of living togeth-
er as Europeans must guide 
us while ensuring our conti-
nent’s security, development 
and boosting cooperation.

ciples and freedoms that lie at the heart of our 
model of society. At the international level, we 
are committed to building a new governance of 
artificial  intelligence  with  the  United  Nations. 
However, innovation must not relegate culture 
to the background.

On the contrary, culture must benefit from the 
same resources as those allocated to security. 
We  are  firmly  convinced  that  a  democracy  at 
risk  is  culturally  impoverished.  Hence why we 
call for every 1 euro spent on security that an-
other 1 euro should be invested in culture.

Culture was, is, and always will be the best as-
set for the future of our youth and the natural 
barrier  against  nationalist  and  populist  ideas. 
We  recognise  its  essential  role  in  preserving 
our society’s values and identity.

We are firmly committed to continuing and in-
tensifying our initiatives to guarantee and im-
prove their daily lives. This includes strengthen-
ing their protection as consumers and reducing 
social, generational and regional disparities. We 
strongly  push  for  policies  and  regulations  to 
fight against planned obsolescence and a fairer 
and more sustainable single market for produc-
ers and consumers.

At the heart of our conviction lies the impera-
tive  of  involving  the  people  and  including  re-
gions. We will reduce the gap between reality 
and the public’s perception of European institu-
tions. With this in mind, we will pay close atten-
tion to urban and rural dynamics, even down to 
the most concrete details.

The crucial role of mayors will finally be recog-
nised as the leading actors in our approach to 
European  politics.  Their  proximity  to  citizens 
and  their  understanding  of  local  needs  gives 
them  an  invaluable  influence  in  implementing 
our  vision.  By  involving  citizens,  highlighting 
regional specificities and valuing the power of 
councillors, we will build a Europe that is more 
democratic, participatory and anchored to what 
people live every day.

14

15

Our vision of a diverse society goes beyond       
the fight against discrimination: we are 
fighting to build a society where differences 
are not only accepted, but celebrated.

We aspire to a Europe that promotes harmonious coexistence in all its diversity. Recurrent migra-
tion crises have highlighted the need for a unified approach. Thus, we will implement an asylum 
and immigration policy that is humane and fair, respecting the fundamental rights of each individ-
ual while ensuring the security and successful integration of migrants. Our commitment will turn 
towards a migration policy based on solidarity between Member States and support for initiatives 
to address the root causes of forced migration. We will also strive to establish common rules to 
tackle  the  challenges  of  economic  and  climate  migration.  Furthermore,  recognising  the  urgent 
need to ensure that Member States in the South are no longer left to police vast stretches of mar-
itime borders on their own, we will actively support the implementation of the new partnership 
between Europeans and Africans, launched in February 2022 under the French Presidency of the 
Council. This partnership is essential to the development of a continent undergoing rapid demo-
graphic expansion.

By supporting Africa as a friend and partner, we aim to control the outflow of its citizens to Eu-
rope better. We will mobilise civil society and young people from both continents to make this vi-
sion a reality. We are convinced that diasporas will be ‘renewable energy sources’ that will propel 
this new strategy of shared growth and prosperity. 

Successful  integration  requires  European  policies  that  include  cities  and  regions  upstream  and 
downstream. Citizens are integrated at the local level, and the regions provide most of the servic-
es they need, such as healthcare and education. Better knowledge of employment and integration 
opportunities is also found at the regional level, as is the combination of these needs with active 
employment  policies.  Many  regions  are  also  active  in  cooperation.  Failing  to  capitalise  on  this 
knowledge dehumanises European immigration policies.

We are determined to build a strong Europe because it also means a united and influential Europe 
on the world stage. In an era marked by the emergence of new empires, such as China or Russia, 
we want to strengthen integration between Member States in security, defence and foreign af-
fairs.

We will promote initiatives by groups of countries willing and able to go further and faster regard-
ing defence and security integration. This includes support for creating a genuine European mil-
itary force capable of dealing effectively with security crises and threats and new hybrid threats.

The revision of the treaties 
must be aimed at a sovereign 
Europe that will allow us 
to truly regain control of 
our destiny.

Strategic autonomy is essential if we are to de-
velop a genuine European pillar within NATO 
and  strengthen  our  alliance  with  the  United 
States.  Together,  Europeans  and  Americans, 
we  aspire  to  promote  a  new  alliance  for  de-
mocracy on a global scale.

Moreover, unlike nationalist parties that prior-
itise their particular and electoral interests, es-
tablish  alliances with  powers  outside  Europe, 
manipulate  the  media  and  interfere  in  the 

economy of our democracies, we are committed to taking concrete action to ensure our collective 
autonomy and security in partnership with all other democracies in the world. 

Health is an essential part of our manifesto. This is why we recognise the crucial importance of 
autonomy  in  terms  of  healthcare  and  proposes  to  strengthen  Europe’s  capacity  for  action  and 
relocate the production of medicines and medical equipment within the Union.

By ensuring full coverage of the strategic product value chain, this measure will strengthen our 
ability  to  meet  the  healthcare  needs  of  our  citizens  while  reducing  our  dependence  on  exter-
nal  sources.  Thus,  adequate  medicines  and  medical  equipment  availability  will  be  guaranteed, 
increasing our resilience during health crises. By using new common standards and sharing data 
with doctors and health professionals, we can also benefit from technological advances at the 
service of citizens while developing major European research centres.

We want to give our young people every opportunity to succeed and fulfil their potential without 
being held back by social, economic or geographical obstacles. This will require a concrete and 
effective youth policy for the European Union, capable of providing the tools it needs. 

With the European elections just a few months away, we are ready to say loud and clear that we 
want a Europe where debates belong to the people. We will always vigorously defend our vision 
for a humanist European society. 

Europe is a multiplier of opportunities, rights and protection for our people, especially the most 
vulnerable.

Therefore, the time has come to set in motion a new political dynamic and reinvent ourselves. 
To build a better and more resilient future, we offer innovative solutions to continue the European 
transformation that started in 2019 and remedy the flaws that could alter our foundations. 
We are sure that the pro-European central forces will increasingly become the driving force be-
hind the European recovery. 

We call on all Europeans to join us in this campaign for a strong and united Europe. 

Together, we can shape a better future where the values of freedom, democracy, equality and 
solidarity are fully achieved.

16

17

The  world  is  changing.  Borders  are  shaking. 
Countries  are  becoming  tense  and  fractured. 
Like  tectonic  plates,  they  scrape  against  each 
other. By joining forces, we can reinvent a Eu-
rope  that  is  stronger,  more  democratic,  more 
progressive,  and  ready  to  meet  the  challenges 
of the 21st century.

The global challenges are immense and we will 
not let hatred cloud our vision. And that is why 
it is with a heavy heart that we speak of the “Is-
raeli 9/11”. 

What  happened  in  Israel  on  7  October  2023 
was not a terrible act of war nor a demonstra-
tion  of  territorial  or  nationalist  claims.  No,  it 
was the pure hatred of a heinous monster that 
erupted from the Gaza Strip. Its name is Hamas. 

Some are looking for words to describe the un-
speakable,  but  silence,  as  we  in  the  European 
Democratic Party know, is always on the worst 
side. It hides the truth; it obscures reality. 
In reality, there will be no lasting peace without 
recognition of the legitimate right of the Pales-
tinian people to a territory and a state. Nor will 
there be any lasting peace unless the Palestini-
an people and the Palestinian Authority recog-
nise the State of Israel and its security.

Peace  is  the  unique  bond  between  people. 
Peace is the essential bond that enables us to 
face global challenges together. 

We will continue to fight tirelessly for peace. It 
is our commitment, our duty to humanity.
The challenges lie ahead, and European Demo-
crats will rise to meet them.

Time to act… 

18

19

Join us. 

20

21

a)

Convergence 
& Strengthening

22

23

Convergence 
& Strengthening

26
DEMOCRACY AND GOVERNANCE
Democracy and governance are fundamental pillars of any prosperous society. For us, this 
means transparency, citizen participation and the responsibility of the European institu-
tions.
30
GLOBAL POWER EUROPE
Europe must act as a global power to face the growing global challenges. We are com-
mitted to a more robust Common Foreign and Security Policy, greater cooperation in the 
field of defence and a unified voice on the international stage.  
32
CONSOLIDATION AND AUTONOMY
Strengthening Europe’s consolidation and autonomy in key areas such as technology, inno-
vation, energy, and security is essential. We want to invest in research and development, 
creating strategic partnerships between companies and encouraging entrepreneurship.
36
FUNDING COMMON PUBLIC GOODS
Common public goods, such as environmental protection, public health and scientific re-
search, are essential to the well-being of all European citizens. We aim to put adequate 
funding for these sectors in place to ensure a better and sustainable quality of life.
38
COHESION AND EQUITY
The European Union has a duty to promote solidarity and equity among its member states. 
We are committed to minimising economic and social disparities by investing in less de-
veloped regions and facilitating access to education, training and high-level employment 
opportunities while guaranteeing equal opportunities for all citizens.
42
DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION
We want a united, equitable and inclusive Europe where everyone is respected and can 
live fully and freely. We must stand up for universal human rights and remove all obsta-
cles to an inclusive society, embracing transgender, transgenerational and transnational 
diversity.
44
REFORM OF THE EUROZONE
Recognising  the vital  importance  of  the  eurozone, we  propose  implementing  a  specific 
budget to boost economic growth while providing concrete support to countries in diffi-
culty. We are committed to closely coordinating budgetary and fiscal policies within the 
eurozone to avoid significant economic imbalance.

PRIORITY ACTIONS

110/300

24

25

DEMOCRACY 
AND GOVERNANCE

setting up a Citizens’ Agora mechanism.
Every spring, national and European Citizens’ 
Agoras  would  meet  to  debate  and  propose 
priorities for Europe. These exchanges would 
feed into the annual programme presented by 
the  President  of  the  European  Commission 
each September during the State of the Union 
address.  By  offering  citizens  this  platform  to 
express  themselves  actively,  we  will  encour-
age direct participation in shaping Europe and 
strengthen all citizens’ sense of belonging and 
commitment to Europe. 
Democracy  must  be  strengthened  by  includ-
ing  citizens  in  political  decision-making.  By 
providing  transparent  information,  treating 
citizens  as  partners  and  actively  involving 
them, we  guarantee  democratic  stability  and 
avoid many problems.

The current European treaties mark more than 
15 years of progress for Europe. However, the 
European  Union  now  faces  a  unique  oppor-
tunity to strengthen its institutional structure 
and become a sovereign and democratic Eur-
ope. To go even further, we can work to create 
a genuine political union based on solidarity.
We, the European Democrats, call on Europe 
to take back control of its destiny by strength-
ening the continent’s sovereignty and auton-
omy.  Building  a  united  political  community 
will ensure a positive future for Europe, meet-
ing the challenges of populism and violations 
of  international  law  with  constructive  and 
inclusive  solutions.  To  meet  the  challenges 
ahead,  whether  societal,  environmental  or 
security-related,  the  European  Union  must 
act more quickly and effectively. We want to 
build a prosperous and resilient future for our 
continent. Together, we can ensure that Eur-
ope is a positive force for its citizens and the 
world.
Furthermore,  to  strengthen  democracy,  we 
must  establish  the  possibility  of  electing  a 
president  of  the  European  Union  from  elec-
toral lists common to all EU countries.
And if citizens are to renew their ties with Eur-
ope  and  its  institutions,  direct  involvement 
in  the  political  life  of  the  Union  is  essential. 
Waiting for the European elections every five 
years is no longer enough to promote citizen 
participation. We propose an innovative step: 

25/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

•  Establish a treaty revision convention to abolish unanimous 

• 

voting in the Council.
Implement the proposals of the Conference on the Future of 
Europe to meet the demands of European citizens in this field.
•  Facilitate the faster political integration of groups of coun-
tries and peoples who demonstrate the political will to do 
so without the possibility of blocking by others.

•  Establish  the  possibility  of  electing  a  president  of  the  Eu-
ropean Union from electoral lists common to all European 
countries  (merging  the  President  of  the  Commission  and 
the President of the European Council).
Include transnational lists in European Parliament elections. 
• 
•  Provide  the  European  Parliament  with  legislative  co-deci-
sion  rights when  it  plays  an  advisory  role  and  co-decision 
rights on the budget, including revenue.

•  Grant Parliament a genuine right of a legislative initiative to 

complement the European Citizens’ Initiative.

•  Strengthen the role of the European Union in areas such as 

• 

health, education and energy.
Introduce an emergency clause to authorise the European 
Union to act with extraordinary powers in a major crisis.
•  Strengthening  European  political  parties  and  foundations 

would increase their viability.

•  Ensure  transparency  in  funding  political  parties  and  elec-
tion campaigns and prohibit international interference.
•  Strengthen the capacity of political parties and movements 

to conduct transnational political campaigns. 

• 

•  Activate  the  clauses  allowing  qualified  majority voting  for 
certain EU decisions. This will avoid the blockages that can 
occur with the current unanimity system.
Implement temporary passerelle clauses to allow for signif-
icant legal and institutional changes using simplified proce-
dures. 
Improve the voting rights of residents in another Member 
State at European elections. 

• 

ENDING
VETOS

DIRECT ELECTION 
OF THE EU PRESIDENT

TRANSNATIONAL
LISTS

MORE POWERS
FOR PARLIAMENT

SIMPLIFYING 
VOTING ABROAD

•  Facilitate  the  participation  of  European  citizens  residing 
in another Member State by enabling them to vote and/or 
stand in their country’s regional or national elections.

26

27

•  Propose the creation of a European agency to strengthen democra-
cy  in  the  decision-making  process,  citizen  participation within  the 
EU and the role of national parliaments.

•  Ensure equal opportunities for all EU citizens, and pay particular at-

tention to the most vulnerable and marginalised.

•  Encourage citizen participation by using new technologies. 
•  Create a European citizenship statute based on the existing treaties.
•  Establish a statute for European cross-border associations.
•  Continue to promote the role of local and regional authorities in cli-
mate and biodiversity policies through subnational climate diplomacy.
•  Develop a pilot project on promoting European values through ed-
ucation and culture, including identifying best practices at local and 
regional levels throughout the European Union, as the Committee of 
the Regions decided.

•  Clarify  that  subsidiarity  is  not  about  preventing  the  European  lev-
el  from  acting  but  about  identifying  the  level  of  government  that 
should take the lead, whether through formal exclusive powers or 
formal shared powers.

•  Grant national and regional parliaments with legislative powers the 
possibility of suggesting legislative initiatives at the European Union 
level  in  the  future  by  providing  a  specific  mechanism  for  this  pur-
pose in the regulation governing the European Citizens’ Initiative.
•  Change  the  names  of  the  European  Union’s  institutions  to  clarify 
their  functions  and  respective  roles  in  the  European  Union’s  deci-
sion-making process for citizens.

The European Union 
must act more 
quickly and more 
effectively

28

29

GLOBAL 
POWER EUROPE

cross-border  cooperation  to  achieve  this.  We 
will support specific actions such as establish-
ing joint European intervention forces and pur-
chasing military equipment.
With  regard  to  migration  and  asylum  (see  the 
Migration Flows chapter), we want to align Eu-
ropean policies and improve the protection of 
the European Union’s external borders.
We are determined to combat arms trafficking, 
with a particular focus on the post-war period 
in Ukraine.
We believe in a world where peace is not just an 
ideal but a reality for everyone, guaranteeing a 
safe and harmonious future for all generations.

European Democrats are profoundly convinced 
that  peace  is  the  cornerstone  of  any  prosper-
ous civilisation in Ukraine, Israel, and the world.
In  this  spirit,  we  will  strive  tirelessly  to  culti-
vate  peaceful  relations,  promote  non-violent 
conflict resolution and a culture of peace on a 
global scale.
We are determined to fight corruption, human 
rights  abuses  and  political  repression. We will 
promote international justice and security, par-
ticularly in neighbouring countries, while com-
bating external interference.
We will strengthen cooperation with our part-
ners who share ideas based on mutual respect 
and common values. We aim to play a leading 
role  in  the  reform  of  multilateralism  and  pro-
mote  our values within  international  coopera-
tion.
We want to consolidate the European Union’s 
position  and  influence  globally  by  promoting 
its  strategic  autonomy  and  speaking with  one 
voice.
We want a genuine Common Security and De-
fence  Policy.  The  EU’s  internal  and  external 
security  is  one  of  our  priorities  in  the  face  of 
hybrid  threats,  which  represent  a  major  secu-
rity  challenge.  We  will  propose  strengthening 
European  security  agencies  and  intensifying 

15/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS
HUMAN RIGHTS, DEMOCRACY AND THE RULE OF LAW
•  Promote  world  peace,  international  justice  and  security  in  neighbouring  countries  and 
combat external interference, corruption, human rights abuses, rule of law violations and 
political repression.

•  Protect independent media and ethnic and religious minorities.
•  Create a new global alliance for democracy, especially in partnership with major democra-

cies such as the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada.

•  Take a firm stance against human rights violations against minorities (e.g. LGBTQ+ people) 

in third countries, using all possible means of pressure.

COOPERATION WITH PARTNERS 
•  Play a leading role in the reform of multilateralism, and in particular, call for the reform of 
the United Nations Security Council to create more multilateral alliances as well as pro-
mote dialogue between different cultures and civilisations, strengthen peace, human rights 
and democracy in the world and promote “soft power”, our values and strategic autonomy.

ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION AS A GLOBAL PLAYER 
•  Strengthen the role of European Union companies in non-member countries as multipliers 

of the Union’s values while considering the needs of EU SMEs.
Include these companies in trade agreements.

• 
•  Guarantee respect for European Union labour and human rights standards in international 

trade agreements. 

•  Combat arms trafficking, with a particular focus on the post-war period in Ukraine.

INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL SECURITY
•  Align European migration and asylum policies.
• 
•  Deploy a coherent strategy in the fight against “hybrid threats and campaigns” to help Eu-

Improve the protection of the European Union’s external borders.

ropean countries counter them effectively.

DEFENCE 
•  Develop  a  genuine  European  military  power  and  support  Europe’s  strategic  autonomy 

while preserving the transatlantic relationship with NATO.

•  Strengthen the European Union Military Staff (EUMS) to ensure effective coordination and 

planning of military operations.

•  Encourage  joint  European  procurement  of  military  equipment  to  achieve  economies  of 

scale.

30

31

CONSOLIDATION 
AND AUTONOMY

In the vast field of industry, where our future is forged, we are committed to cultivating a Eu-
ropean economy that protects our resources, diversifies our supplies, safeguards our strategic 
companies and promotes fair competition on a global scale.
Thus, to reduce our dependence on a small group of supplier countries, we will be diversifying 
our sources of supply and ensuring their security. At the same time, we will institute effective 
reuse and recycling mechanisms to mitigate the environmental and economic consequences 
of the extraction of these resources.
In addition, we will pay particular attention to the threat of economic espionage. By imple-
menting advanced surveillance methods and implementing appropriate protection measures, 
we will strengthen our resilience against this growing threat.
But there can be no autonomy without transport. In this area, as well as adopting new digital 
and energy technologies, we are committed to investing in an efficient network of high-speed 
rail, air and sea links. We are convinced that improving infrastructure will facilitate cross-border 
travel and promote European integration. By developing transport – especially public trans-
port – we will increase trade, encourage intra-European tourism and make it easier for people 
to get around. 
In addition, we will develop simplified and transparent procedures to facilitate access to fund-
ing for research and development. By supporting access to EU funds, we will stimulate crea-
tivity, encourage the emergence of new ideas and strengthen Europe’s competitiveness on the 
world stage. 
In order to create employment opportunities, promote growth and allow Europe to remain at 
the forefront of technological innovation, we will implement policies and incentives and en-
courage the transformation of research results into concrete products and services.
Finally, we are convinced that investment in the space sector is essential for Europe’s compet-
itiveness,  security  and  prosperity.  However, we will  promote  responsible  practices  in  space 
exploration and put in place security rules to protect the interests of the EU and its Member 
States in space. 

20/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS
INDUSTRY  
• 

Increase the circularity of materials in the European Union by developing the 
reuse and recycling of rare materials, with comprehensive supply chain moni-
toring and promoting eco-design.

•  Develop the sustainable exploitation of strategic raw materials in the European 

Union and further diversify our imports.

•  Better control the export of strategic goods and technologies.
•  More closely monitor and counter economic espionage by foreign actors.
•  Enable fair international competition and support our strategic industries  by 
considering  the  creation  of  a  European  fund  to  protect  strategic  industries 
against coercive practices or takeover attempts from outside the Union.

TRANSPORT
•  Demand compliance with the investment plans set out in the Trans-European 
Transport Networks (TEN-T) to improve cross-border connectivity through a 
European network of high-speed rail, air and sea links.

•  Accelerate the transport sector’s digitisation and ecological transition and de-

velop an integrated, smart and European mobility system.

•  Support the production of batteries and energy storage in the European Union 

and the deployment of alternative fuel supply infrastructures.

•  Propose the celebration of a European Year 

of Cycling. 

•  Make  the  European  Union  a  leader  in  ze-

ro-emission aircraft. 

•  Strengthen public transport, particularly by 
simplifying its use through shared ticketing 
systems. 

•  Develop the Single European Sky, a key el-
ement in the efficiency of air transport and 
emissions reduction.

32

33

RESEARCH AND INNOVATION 
•  Simplify  access  to  European 
Union  funds  for  research  and 
development,  particularly  for 
SMEs and researchers. 

•  Promote  the  commercialisation 
and  market  adoption  of  new 
technologies and innovations in 
the European Union. 

•  Promote synergies between Eu-

ropean programmes.

SPACE
•  Propose  general  European  Un-
ion legislation for space, includ-
ing  environmental  and  space 
sustainability criteria and space 
security rules. 
Increase  the  European  Union’s 
space budget, mainly to guaran-
tee  its  access  to  space  and  the 
development of its satellite con-
stellations  (Galileo,  Copernicus, 
IRIS 2). 

• 

•  Propose the creation of a Euro-
pean  Space  Command  to  pro-
tect better our European space 
assets and those of the Member 
States. 

•  Support  the  launch  of  public 
and  commercial  satellites  from 
the European Union. 

•  Revise  the  Treaties  to  give  the 
European  Union  a  greater  role 
in regulating space.

34

35

FUNDING COMMON 
PUBLIC GOODS

The  significance  of  this  approach  lies  in  the 
fact that no Member State can raise funds in 
isolation. In the face of the challenges that lie 
ahead, it is not a simple transfer of resources 
from one country to another that must be im-
agined, but rather a collective response from 
the  Union.  We  want  to  act  at  the  European 
level,  where  individual  states  cannot  do  so 
effectively. This is what we mean by subsidi-
arity. 
These  new  resources  will  be  specifically  al-
located  to  projects where  the  pooling  of  re-
sources  makes  the  most  sense.  Our  priority 
will  therefore  be  to  support  artificial  intel-
ligence,  invest  in  tomorrow’s  economy  (es-
pecially  in  the  digitisation  of  industry)  and 
support research into renewable energy and 
future technologies.

It’s time to talk about funding. A central ques-
tion looms: how can we provide the Europe-
an Union with new own resources to support 
our collective ambitions?
Although  in  November  2022  the  Parliament 
gave the green light to the Commission’s pro-
posal to introduce a first set of three new own 
resources  (an  expanded  Emissions  Trading 
Scheme, a Carbon Border Adjustment Mech-
anism and a share of the reallocated profits of 
very large multinational companies*), we are 
looking further ahead.
We  are  convinced  that,  in  order  to  revital-
ise  the  European  economy,  it  is  essential  to 
strengthen  direct  funding  while  reducing  its 
dependence on national contributions or tax-
es levied on citizens. Indeed, citizens must not 
be  taxed  by  Europe.  Instead,  large  polluting 
companies  and  digital  giants  take  advantage 
of the single market while externalising their 
activities, which must be held accountable to 
achieve these objectives.
This  approach  will  allow  us  to  fund  new  in-
frastructure, research projects, and the green 
and  digital  transitions  without  excessively 
burdening any Member State.

(*) Resources are generated from contributions from the Emissions Trading System (ETS), the Carbon Border Ad-
justment Mechanism (CBAM), and a share of the residual profits of large multinational companies.

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

OWN RESOURCES
•  Develop corporate taxation to align corporate tax bases within the EU.
• 

Introduce taxation of crypto-currencies, a poorly regulated sector that exploits the differ-
ent tax regimes applicable between Member States.

•  Adopt a tax on digital giants so that all players pay their fair share, as they are taxed at half 

the rate of traditional European companies.

•  Ensure  that  large  multinational  companies  contribute  proportionately  to  their  footprint, 

particularly those with a significant environmental impact.

•  Ensure that these new resources are generated in a fair and transparent manner.
RELAUNCH
•  Support new infrastructure and research projects, create jobs, and strengthen global com-

petitiveness.

GREEN, DIGITAL AND KNOWLEDGE TRANSITION
•  Allocate a significant share of new own resources to projects related to renewable ener-
gies, research on the technologies of the future and the digitisation of industry, culture and 
Erasmus.

COMPETITIVENESS
•  Ensure that the European Union is not placed at a competitive disadvantage.
•  Encourage the participation of citizens in the definition of projects financed by these re-

sources, thus guaranteeing a democratic and transparent approach.

UNION OF VALUES
•  Strengthen the European Union’s ability to finance civil society or local authorities directly 
when adopting financial sanctions for breaches of the rule of law against a European Un-
ion government by promoting smart budgetary cross-compliance and giving the European 
Union the possibility of providing financing, as proposed by Renew Europe.

36

37

COHESION 
AND EQUITY 

We  are  fully  committed  to  promoting  gender 
equality by ensuring everyone has equal access 
to education and employment opportunities in 
key  sectors.  Investing  in  developing  skills  and 
expertise  for  all  will  stimulate  innovation  and 
strengthen competitiveness. We also promote 
the well-being, health and safety of families and 
their members in our demographically changing 
society.
Intergeneration is also one of our priorities; we 
are committed to young people and the elderly. 
We aspire to build a balanced, resilient society 
where  each  individual,  regardless  of  age,  can 
meet future challenges. We firmly believe that 
the  key  to  sustainable  collective  prosperity  is 
providing  everyone with  the  necessary  means 
and opportunities.
To  achieve  this  goal,  we  will  implement  poli-
cies  that  promote  investment  in  young  peo-
ple.  We  consider  them  to  be  the  foundations 
of our future and are committed to supporting 
their  acquisition  of  skills,  mobility  and  access 
to high-quality internships. By investing in the 
training and development of young people, we 
will  shape  a  dynamic  and  skilled  generation 
ready  to  contribute  actively  to  the  prosperity 
and sustainability of our society. 
At the same time, we will develop policies and 
initiatives  for  seniors  to  ensure  their  well-be-
ing, active participation in society and access to 
continuing opportunities.
By  guaranteeing  equitable  access  to  quality 
training, we will enable all individuals to devel-
op  their  potential  and  contribute  fully  to  the 
economy and society. 
We also want to create a European Talent Ob-

servatory  to  promote  collaboration  between 
Member States to identify best practices in ed-
ucation, training and skills development. 
We  are  firmly  convinced  that  by  encouraging 
educational innovation, we can ensure that our 
continent remains at the forefront of education 
and training.
We believe deeply in a Europe that celebrates 
diversity.  We  consider  it  a  strength  that  must 
be valued. Strengthening the welfare state and 
social protection systems to enable them to re-
spond to the demographic, digital and ecolog-
ical transitions underway will always be at the 
heart of our commitment. 
In  the  European  Union  of  tomorrow,  the  indi-
vidual will  be  at  the  heart  of  the  city. We will 
create  fully  accessible,  barrier-free  cities  for 
people with  reduced  mobility.  Families will  be 
recognised  and  respected  throughout  Europe, 
with  national  laws  guaranteeing  equality  and 
dignity for all. 
We will be at the forefront of promoting equal-
ity and respect for all. We will ensure that our 
European standards, which are already among 
the  most  advanced  in  the  world,  become  in-
creasingly consistent across the Union.

PRIORITY ACTIONS25/300

FIGHTING FOR GENDER EQUALITY
•  Ensure equal pay for men and women.
•  Consider equality as a factor of competitiveness by allowing the integra-

tion of all available talent into the productive system.

•  Fight  harassment  in  the workplace  and  advance  gender  equality  con-

stantly and relentlessly in all aspects of life.

•  Guarantee sexual and reproductive rights throughout the European Un-

ion.

•  Eradicate  all  forms  of  violence  against  women  and  children  and  gen-

der-based violence.

INTERGENERATION
•  Extend European legal protection against age discrimination beyond the 

field of employment.

•  Allow  older  people  to  benefit  from  long-term  care  by  strengthening 

their independence, integration, and societal role.

•  Ensure the participation of older people in all areas by promoting a Eu-

ropean strategy for active ageing.

•  Allow full, affordable and equal access to public services such as public 

transport and housing.

•  Facilitate transition periods between learning, work, family care and pe-
riods of unemployment, and allow retirement to take place at different 
ages.

•  Promote human rights throughout life at the United Nations. 

QUALITY TRAINING
•  Create a European Talent Observatory.
•  Allow the export of social security rights to encourage mobility. 
•  Encourage adequate minimum wages.
•  Protect safety at work and ensure health, physical and mental safety.

38

39

EQUALITY FOR ALL
•  Combat  poverty,  develop  targeted  support 
programmes and, in particular, tackle the is-
sue of child poverty.

•  Tackle  the  issue  of  decent  and  affordable 
housing while eradicating “homelessness”. 
•  Support  households  and  businesses  facing 
fuel poverty and assistance for building ren-
ovation.

•  Ensure equal rights for people with disabili-
ties, facilitate their free movement and intro-
duce a European Disability Card.

A NEW WORLD OF WORK
•  Protect  workers  with  non-standard  status 
and provide them with social protection re-
gardless of their employment status.

•  Recognise a right to disconnect and regulate 

the practice of remote working.

•  Promote  the  upgrading  of  workers  on  the 
front line and define the essential sectors of 
the economy more clearly.

40

41

DIVERSITY 
AND INCLUSION

We believe in a united, fair and inclusive Europe 
where  everyone  is  respected  and  can  live  fully 
and freely. We will, therefore, vigorously defend 
universal human rights rooted in our rich Euro-
pean culture. Our fight will remove all obstacles 
to  an  inclusive  society,  embracing  transgender, 
transgenerational and transnational diversity.
We will actively support diversity and inclusion, 
defend the rights of minorities and work for the 
adoption  of  the  horizontal  anti-discrimination 
directive. We will guarantee equality by ensuring 
the same rights for all families in all countries of 
the Union.
In  addition,  we  will  abolish  structural  barriers 
across the continent, ensuring unhindered access 
for people with reduced mobility. To strengthen 
our commitment to fundamental rights, we will 
double the budget and staff of the European Un-
ion Agency for Fundamental Rights, thereby ex-
panding its mandate and functions. 

PRIORITY ACTIONS5/300

•  Recognising and upholding universal human rights is an integral part 
of our European culture, and we will work to remove all obstacles to 
building a fully inclusive society: transgender, transgenerational and 
transnational.

•  Promote  diversity  and  inclusion,  defend  respect  for  minorities  and 
support the adoption of the horizontal anti-discrimination directive, 
which has been awaited since 2008.

•  Ensure that families enjoy the same rights as in their country of origin 

in all EU countries.

•  Promote an ambitious plan to remove structural barriers throughout 
the Union and thus allow access for people with reduced mobility.
•  Strengthen the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights by dou-
bling its budget and staff and broadening its mandate and functions.

42

43

REFORMING 
THE EUROZONE

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

We  want  to  create  the  digital  euro  while  tak-
ing  care  not  to  eliminate  liquidity. This  innov-
ation  will  offer  citizens  a  new  payment  tool, 
capitalising  on  the  transformative  capacity  of 
digital  currencies. This  digital  euro will  not  be 
a  replacement  for  cash  but  a  new  method  of 
payment. 

While respecting the fundamental principles of 
confidentiality  and  convenience  of  payments, 
the creation of the digital euro will propel our 
common currency to the forefront of the 21st 
century  and  enable  us  to  retain  our  monetary 
sovereignty in the face of other major powers 
who are also developing their digital currencies.

In an ever-changing world, reforming the euro-
zone is a complex issue that requires an ambi-
tious initiative and collective action.
Our  proposal  is  clear:  a  courageous  reform  of 
the eurozone. We are determined to create an 
economic union that not only withstands crises 
but becomes even stronger and more prosper-
ous. 
In the face of the threat of the return of infla-
tion and low growth on our continent, we are 
responsible  for  building  a  stronger  eurozone, 
an  area  that  resonates  with  growth  and  con-
vergence  between  all  member  countries  and 
whose operation will be optimised.
The  unity  of  the  European  Union  remains  our 
most  valuable  asset.  Still,  knowing  that  each 
Member  State  has  unique  economic  charac-
teristics and needs, we propose a balanced ap-
proach that will encourage the development of 
common  standards  while  taking  into  account 
national specificities. This approach will be the 
key  to  implementing  effective  structural  re-
forms, strengthening the capacity of our econ-
omies  to  grow  together  and  withstand  turbu-
lence from outside.
Reform also means modernising the eurozone. 

CONVERGENCE TO BECOME STRONGER  
•  Recognise the importance of country-specific approaches.
•  Facilitate harmonious growth throughout the eurozone and strengthen financial 

stability.

•  Encourage investment to achieve key objectives such as the twin green and digi-

tal transition and the EU’s strategic autonomy.

STRUCTURAL REFORMS 
•  Work  towards  a  eurozone  where  economic  challenges  are  tackled  collectively 

and align our budgetary policies.

•  Propose a stricter and more transparent adherence to existing budgetary rules. 
•  Ensure  responsible  budget  management  to  address  disparities  in  employment, 

growth and productivity and take better account of climate-related risks.

•  Promote  equitable  economic  development  throughout  the  eurozone  while  en-
couraging the public investment necessary for a just transition to a carbon-free 
economy.

COMPLIANCE WITH BUDGETARY RULES AND COOPERATION
•  Promote economic cooperation and new joint investments (particularly in digital, 

ecological and security fields).

DIGITAL EURO
• 

Introduce our digital currency to retain monetary sovereignty and consolidate the 
eurozone as a world leader.

PAYMENT METHODS OF THE FUTURE
•  Develop digital financial identification across the EU, enabling customers, banks, 
and investors to easily recognise identification from other EU Member States.
•  Push the European Central Bank (ECB) to better monitor large liquid and digital 
transactions  to  combat  money  laundering,  tax  evasion  financing  terrorism  and 
organised crime.

44

45

b)

Global 
Renaissance

46

47

Global 
Renaissance

50
MIGRATION FLOWS
Europe must take a humane approach to migration flows while guaranteeing security and 
integration. We propose a comprehensive approach based on international cooperation, 
including creating legal channels for economic migration, the protection of refugees and 
the fight against the root causes of forced migration.

54
GREEN AND BLUE LEADERSHIP
We are committed to leading the transition to a green and circular economy. Europe must 
be a world leader in the fight against climate change by investing in renewable energies, 
promoting sustainable mobility, and supporting environmental research.

58
ENHANCED HEALTHCARE
The pandemic has highlighted the importance of this sector. We propose strengthening 
European  healthcare  systems  by  improving  coordination  and  response  to  health  crises. 
Europe must invest in medical research, guarantee equitable access to treatment and pro-
mote healthy lifestyles for all..

60
FOOD SOVEREIGNTY
We support sustainable agriculture that preserves biodiversity, promotes soil health and 
guarantees high-quality food. Food sovereignty is essential to reduce external dependen-
cy and promote local production that respects the environment. We will also encourage 
responsible fishing to preserve our marine ecosystems.

64
DIGITAL REVOLUTION
Europe must embrace the digital revolution while protecting individual rights and privacy. 
We advocate the creation of a digital single market, encouraging technological innovation 
and  digital  inclusion  for  all  citizens.  Cybersecurity  and  ethical  regulation  will  be  at  the 
heart of our approach.
66
450 MILLION CONSUMERS
Consumer rights must be protected in a competitive and sustainable European market. 
We promote product transparency, consumer safety and access to clear information. Our 
commitment to consumer rights will help build trust and encourage fairer business prac-
tices.

PRIORITY ACTIONS

95

/300

48

49

MIGRATION 
FLOWS

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

As Europe prepares to face the challenge of population decline, we advocate a strategic and 
concerted approach to asylum and migration policies between Member States.
While recognising the need to address the challenge of migration by investing wisely in local 
economies, our commitment to effectively securing our land and sea borders remains an un-
wavering priority. 
In collaboration with local and regional authorities and national and European forces, we will 
affirm our commitment to the informed management of economic migration. This will result in 
establishing “European quotas” that will regulate economic flows, thus guaranteeing an order-
ly arrival of individuals on our continent. At the same time, we will deploy a robust strategy to 
dismantle criminal networks while saving those in distress at sea.
Human rights and equality lie at the heart of what we do. For every migrant, we will always 
put social, economic and cultural integration at the forefront. Special attention will be paid to 
unaccompanied minors and young people who have recently arrived on our continent. To this 
end, we will  mobilise  the  necessary  resources  to  catalyse  integration  projects  that  actively 
involve them and guide them towards a successful transition to the professional world.
Through these fundamental values, we aim to shape an inclusive Europe rooted in security 
and deeply respecting human rights. By embracing the dynamics of migration, we are seizing 
the opportunities to create a strong and diverse Europe.

IN SITU DEVELOPMENT 
•  Develop economic investment programmes in migrants’ countries of origin.
•  Stimulate economic development and job creation.
•  Ensure access to education, vocational training and employment.

BALANCED ECONOMIC MIGRATION POLICIES
• 

Implement enhanced security measures to prevent and combat illegal im-
migration. 

•  Adopt “European quotas” to regulate economic flows and ensure migration 

is orderly and advantageous.

•  Accelerate the processing of return requests to ease the burden on migrants 

and host countries.

•  Establish effective assisted and voluntary return mechanisms to enable mi-

grants to return to their country of origin in safety and dignity. 

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC INTEGRATION
• 

Implement policies that promote solid social, economic and cultural integra-
tion by integrating cities and regions upstream and downstream of migra-
tion policy decision-making processes and establishing financial aid mech-
anisms to respond to humanitarian emergencies. This is where integration 
takes place, and most services are provided.

VISAS AND DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION
•  Use visas to encourage regular migration and improve cooperation with the 

country of origin.

•  Promote cooperation and the development of relations in the field of mi-

gration. 

50

51

While recognising the need 
to address the challenge 
of migration by investing 
wisely in local economies, 
our commitment to effectively 
securing our borders remains 
an unwavering priority.

  EUROPEAN QUOTAS

  ECONOMIC FLOWS

  DISMANTLING CRIMINAL NETWORKS

INTEGRATION

Through these fundamental values, 
we aim to shape an inclusive Europe 
rooted in security and deeply 
respecting

human 
rights

52

53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GREEN AND BLUE 
LEADERSHIP

tainable  modes  of  transport  and  facilitating 
the transition to a circular economy. We will 
also  actively  encourage  the  sorting  of waste 
and the repair of products.
By  strengthening  regional  cooperation  and 
promoting  citizen  participation,  we  will  ex-
ploit  new  technologies  to  boost  democracy 
while  celebrating  diversity  and  promoting 
inclusion. Through this, we aim for a positive 
environmental and societal transformation.
We will also support the research and devel-
opment  of  innovative  energy  technologies, 
such as osmotic and fusion energy. Enhanced 
cooperation  between  EU  Member  States  in 
the field of energy is also fundamental to en-
sure  the  energy  security  of  the  entire  conti-
nent. 
We will fully support the improvement of in-
terconnections between national energy grids, 
promoting the sharing of resources, strength-
ening flexibility and encouraging solidarity in 
the event of energy supply disruptions. 

To combat climate change effectively, our par-
ty will  take  a  pragmatic  approach,  guided  by 
data rather than ideology, while ensuring that 
the burden of financing actions does not fall 
on taxpayers.
One of our priorities is to reduce the EU’s en-
ergy dependence by developing clean energy 
production  while  respecting  technological 
neutrality.  We  will  encourage  using  renew-
able  energy  and  nuclear  power  according  to 
national choices, recognising their crucial role 
in reducing CO2 emissions. We will ensure an 
efficient and sustainable energy transition by 
exploiting all available solutions. 
Our commitment will be based on the pillars 
of  solidarity,  stability,  sustainability  and  sov-
ereignty. We intend to forge a new proactive 
dynamic that aligns the fields of ecology and 
economics. In this spirit, we will adopt a global 
perspective while acting locally.
Our  approach  will  focus  on  two  key  areas: 
firstly, a clearly  defined  strategy for the  pru-
dent  management  of  our  resources,  starting 
with the precious resources of water and our 
oceans.  Secondly,  we  will  roll  out  ambitious 
decarbonisation  policies,  marking  our  com-
mitment to the energy transition.
We  will  actively  support  regional  authorities 
and encourage the widespread establishment 
of clean energy sources. This will help reduce 
our  dependence  on  fossil  fuels  and  signifi-
cantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
We  will  strive  to  encourage  cooperative  en-
ergy production in areas with high residential 
density,  highlighting  energy  equity  and  pro-
moting the  adoption of renewable solutions. 
In the same spirit, we will transform our cities 
into more welcoming spaces by favouring sus-

15/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS
TRANSITION
•  Avoid the burden of payment falling on citizens and small businesses.
•  Speed up the renovation of buildings (insulation, heat pumps, smart lighting, etc.).
•  Accelerate renewable and nuclear energy (the main source of electrical energy in 

• 

Europe that does not produce CO2).
Invest in innovative energy technologies, such as osmotic or fusion energy (par-
ticularly ITER). 

NEW ENERGIES
• 

Improve  interconnections  and  cooperation  between  national  energy  networks 
to strengthen energy security. 

•  Consolidate the outermost regions as energy innovation laboratories by exploit-
ing their size, characteristics, and the need to achieve energy resilience through 
self-sufficiency. 

•  Promote participatory initiatives for cooperative energy production, particularly 

in high-density residential areas.
Involve local communities in the energy transition.

• 

CLIMATE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
•  Promote  a  new  European  maritime  alliance  with  dedicated  funds  and  ad-hoc 

technological solutions.

•  Strengthen European maritime diplomacy based on the One Ocean Summit in 

• 

Brest in 2022.
Involve subnational governments in international climate and biodiversity trea-
ties to ensure effective implementation.

•  Emphasise the circular economy through measures such as waste sorting.
•  Reduce water waste by improving and repairing infrastructure.

INFRASTRUCTURE 
•  Expand  and  improve  public  transport  networks  and  make  public  transport  the 

preferred option.

•  Help regional and local authorities make themselves more attractive to businesses.

54

55

t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
E

56

57

ENHANCED 
HEALTHCARE

15/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

In the face of potential health challenges or threats, even though European citizens generally 
have fairly easy access to a full range of medical services, there’s a clear need for enhanced 
cooperation within the Union. Our future does not lie in independence but in unity.
This vision must be reflected in the seamless coordination of healthcare policies, the constant 
exchange  of  crucial  information  and  the  establishment  of  mechanisms  for  anticipation  and 
instantaneous  reaction. The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  highlighted  the  crucial  importance  of 
collaboration between EU Member States to address a global health crisis successfully.
By proposing the strategic relocation of medicines and medical equipment production within 
the European Union, we will secure the entire supply chain of essential products, thus reducing 
our dependence on external sources.
By promoting common, comparable and interoperable parameters, we will catalyse the effi-
cient  collection  and  analysis  of  health  data  across  Europe. We will  then  be  able  to  monitor 
epidemics in real time and adjust our public health strategies accordingly. 
We want to strengthen the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control by equipping 
it with a new capacity to analyse digital data (big data). We would like to dedicate this centre 
to our late colleague Véronique Trillet-Lenoir, an eminent doctor and respected politician.
However, we will always balance this quest for efficiency with unfailing vigilance in terms of 
data confidentiality and security. Guided by the highest standards, we will promote coopera-
tion between Member States.

•  Strengthen the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control by equipping it with a 

new digital data and processing analysis capability.

•  Relocate the production of medicines and medical equipment in the EU.
•  Create the European Institute of Health to coordinate medical and behavioural research 
in the various Member States. Its mission should also cover the launch of such activities 
based on EU funds. 

•  Encourage Member States to use public-private partnerships in the health sector and facili-
tate cross-border healthcare to enable their residents to access planned healthcare abroad, 
particularly by issuing a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC).
Increase funding and resource allocation to support mental health services, research and 
initiatives.

• 

•  Promote the use of big data in healthcare by promoting common, comparable and interop-

erable parameters.

•  Ensure the highest level of protection for personal data.
•  Encourage healthy habits through public health campaigns and initiatives.
•  Promote patient-centred care by emphasising the importance of informed consent, shared 

decision-making and patient autonomy. 

•  Encourage healthcare providers to involve patients in their treatment plans.
•  Ensure that individuals have access to accurate health information.
•  Advocate for equal access to healthcare services for LGBTQ+ people. 
• 
•  Prioritise mental health in EU budget planning and distribute funds equitably.
• 
•  Work with health professionals, NGOs and pressure groups to strengthen support.

Improve mental health outcomes in Member States.

Introduce prevention into school curricula.

58

59

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE 
AND RESPONSIBLE FISHING

Our priority is finding the right balance between food production and preserving our natural 
environment, both on land and at sea. We are convinced that these two objectives are inter-
dependent and that we can effectively meet pressing economic and environmental needs by 
aligning sustainable food production with nature conservation. 
We want to adopt an efficient and environmentally friendly agricultural model that is capable 
of coping with the challenges of climate change and biodiversity loss while guaranteeing the 
interests of farmers, consumers and rural communities.
To  achieve  this  goal, we  propose  significant  public  and  private  investment  in  areas  such  as 
innovation, digitisation, education and training. We will ensure that these investments, which 
are cornerstones for strengthening the competitiveness and sustainability of the sector, pros-
per and guarantee decent living conditions for agriculture and fisheries professionals, as well 
as a future for the generations to come.
But, in order to preserve our most precious resource, water, we will strengthen the Union’s 
policies  by  establishing  sustainable  and  effective  management. We will  promote water-effi-
cient agricultural practices, investment in modern irrigation infrastructure, and establish regu-
latory mechanisms to avoid waste or depletion of water resources. Proper water management 
will be a major asset for food security in Europe.
We are determined to embrace digitisation and innovation as the pillars of modern and sustain-
able agriculture. By supporting the development of advanced agricultural technologies such as 
precision farming, the use of sensors, artificial intelligence and robotics, we aspire to increase 
the  efficiency  of  farms  and  reduce  their  carbon  footprint. This  approach  will  help  optimise 
resources and improve productivity while strengthening farmers’ position in the value chain.
We will pay particular attention to fisheries and aquaculture, recognising their fundamental 
role in food security. We firmly believe that the Common Fisheries Policy plays a key role in 
ensuring  the  sustainability  of  this  sector.  While  highlighting  the  conservation  efforts  made 
over the last decade, we will stress the need to restore the balance between environmental 
imperatives and the economic and social needs of the sector.
Last but not least, traceability, transparency and a guarantee of the origin and food production 
methods will be essential pillars of our approach. We are committed to ensuring that consum-
ers can be accurately informed about how food is produced in accordance with the environ-
ment and animal welfare. 

PRIORITY ACTIONS30/300

WATER
•  Strengthen EU water policies for sustainable and effective management.
•  Promote water-efficient agricultural practices.
Invest in modern irrigation infrastructure.
• 
Implement regulatory mechanisms to prevent water waste and depletion.
• 
•  Contribute to food security. 
•  Guarantee adequate supplies for agriculture. 
•  Preserve the environment and water quality.
AGRICULTURE
•  Support  advanced  agricultural  technologies  such  as  precision  farming,  sensors,  artificial 

intelligence and robotics.
Improve the efficiency of farms.

• 
•  Reduce our carbon footprint. 
•  Optimise the use of resources through digitisation and innovation.
•  Create new opportunities for farmers and encourage generational change by considering 

rural land as a strategic asset and promoting access to land for new farmers.

•  Strengthen the position of farmers in the value chain. 
•  Ensure the resilience of the European food system.
•  Take into account local and regional needs.
•  Protect soil, animals and biodiversity.
•  Reduce food waste.
•  Support resilient supply chains and competitive SMEs in rural areas.
FISHING
•  Advocate for increased digitisation and traceability of fisheries products.
•  Protect the quality of products. 
•  Ensure fair competition.
•  Strengthen sustainable fisheries partnership agreements with third countries. 
•  Support the external dimension of the Common Fisheries Policy.
•  Promote the European fleet’s leadership in sustainability with technical and financial sup-
port  for  decarbonisation,  digitisation,  improved  living  conditions  and  regulatory  com-
pliance.

•  Align the decarbonisation objectives of the Green Deal with the Fisheries and Aquaculture 

Fund.

•  Adapt the Common Fisheries Policy through regionalisation and co-management.
•  Prioritise the promotion of sustainable aquaculture and alternative food sources, such as 

seaweed farming.
Implement strict controls to prevent the import of unsustainable seafood products.

• 
•  Recognise the importance of coastal communities. 
•  Promote income diversification through environmentally friendly businesses.
•  Advocate  for  the  appointment  of  a  specific  Commissioner  for  Fisheries,  in  line with  the 

importance of the Common Fisheries Policy.

60

61

Food 
Sovereignty

62

63

THE DIGITAL 
REVOLUTION

Digital  technology  is  the  cornerstone  of  Eu-
rope’s  future.  In  this  era  of  rapid  change,  it 
is imperative that we fully seize the unprec-
edented  opportunities  offered  by  the  digital 
revolution.
We will  invest  in  the  research,  development 
and  implementation  of  Artificial  Intelligence 
(AI). We must not be afraid of it. On the con-
trary, thanks to AI, we can unleash an extraor-
dinary  potential  for  stimulating  innovation, 
optimising  industrial  efficiency  and  shaping 
new economic spheres.
In the face of this digital transformation, we 
are  committed  to  doing  everything  possi-
ble  to  bridge  the  generational  gap.  We  are 
convinced  that  to  build  an  inclusive  digital 
future, providing a comprehensive digital ed-
ucation that is suitable for everyone is crucial. 
Training  in  digital  skills  is  fundamental.  We 
will enable every citizen, whatever their age, 
to learn and take advantage of the opportu-
nities  the  digital  ecosystem  offers.  We  are 
therefore  committed  to  simplifying  adminis-
trative procedures to promote efficiency and 
encourage innovation for all.
Furthermore,  the  strengthening  of  cyberse-

curity will  be  non-negotiable.  Indeed,  as we 
build our digital future, we will further protect 
our infrastructure, data and online services. 
Ensuring  the  confidentiality  and  security  of 
our  citizens’  and  businesses’  data  is  a  cor-
nerstone  for  establishing  a  reliable  digital 
environment.  We  remain  and  will  continue 
to remain firmly committed to preserving the 
utmost  respect  for  fundamental  rights  and 
freedoms. We are committed to ensuring that 
the principles of privacy and freedom of ex-
pression are never compromised. 
We must also strengthen our ability to ensure 
reliable supplies for our industries and reduce 
our  dependence  on  external  suppliers.  This 
will  strengthen  our  economic  sovereignty 
while consolidating our position on the world 
stage.

15/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
•  Allocate significant resources to the research, development and use 

of Artificial Intelligence (AI). 

•  Develop a clear regulatory framework for AI, including transparency 
and control of algorithms, and promote new governance of artificial 
intelligence at the United Nations.

DIGITAL INCLUSION
• 

Invest in comprehensive digital education programmes tailored to all 
citizens. 

•  Strengthen the connectivity of rural areas.
•  Bridge  the  gaps  between  urban  and  rural  areas  and  facilitate  new 

forms of democratic participation.

•  Take greater account of outermost regions.
•  Fully defend the rights and needs of seniors.

SIMPLIFY ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
•  Promote efficiency and encourage innovation.
•  Remove bureaucratic barriers to facilitate digital access for all.

CYBERSECURITY
• 

Implement robust protection measures for our online infrastructure, 
data and services.

•  Ensure the confidentiality and security of our citizens’ and business-

es’ data. 

SOVEREIGNTY
•  Promote  a  European  preference  for  European  digital  products  and 

• 

solutions for public administration.
Increase  semiconductor  and  chip  production  in  the  EU  through  a 
common strategy.

•  Support the storage and processing of data in the EU, in particular to 

protect it from extraterritorial laws.

•  Guarantee a reliable supply.

64

65

450 MILLION 
CONSUMERS 

At  the  heart  of  Europe’s  single  market,  you, 
the  consumers,  guide  our  commitment.  We 
want  to  create  an  environment  where  your 
rights  are  protected,  and  your  interests  are 
valued.
We are resolutely committed to implementing 
the laws adopted and the initiatives launched 
since 2019 that aim to strike a judicious bal-
ance between the responsibilities of compa-
nies  and  the  effective  safeguarding  of  con-
sumer rights. 
We  are  convinced  that  the  rapid  evolution 
of technology must not come at the expense 
of  consumer  safety  and  well-being.  That  is 
why  we  will  ardently  defend  the  idea  that 
everything  considered  illegal  in  the  offline 
world must also be illegal online. Violations of 
consumer rights, unfair commercial practices 
and breaches of confidentiality must not find 
refuge on our continent. 
Thus,  as  the  European  single  market  cannot 
be  complete  without  balanced  and  consist-

ent  online  regulation,  we  are  committed  to 
implementing these laws diligently and work-
ing closely with companies to understand and 
respect the responsibilities arising from their 
digital activities. 
Our  goal  is  to  create  a  digital  environment 
where every consumer can buy, sell and have 
repairs  carried  out  in  complete  confidence, 
knowing that their rights and security are pro-
tected.
We  wish  to  promote  our  economic  model 
on a global scale by collaborating with other 
economies,  including  the  United  States  and 
India, while encouraging the creation of a new 
global  digital  pact  in  support  of  the  United 
Nations.

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

PROMOTE A NEW GLOBAL DIGITAL PACT
•  Ensure compliance with digital rules.
•  Create an independent body to monitor and verify the interoperability of 
digital public services while preserving data protection and subsidiarity.
•  Encourage durability and reparability, and prohibit planned obsolescence.
Inform consumers about rights relating to sustainable products and res-
• 
ponsible business practices.

DEVELOP A CLEAR FRAMEWORK FOR ONLINE 
POLITICAL ADVERTISING
•  Require the disclosure of sources of funding and targeting methods.
• 

Introduce severe sanctions for attempts at foreign interference in demo-
cratic processes while protecting citizens’ privacy.

EVALUATE EACH SECTOR OF THE SINGLE MARKET 
FOR SECTORAL LEGISLATION
•  Establish  consultation  mechanisms  with  industry  players  and  stakehol-

ders to draw up rules tailored to each sector.

MEASURE CYBERSECURITY
•  Strengthen the NIS Directive (Network and Information Systems Direc-
tive) by organising regular evaluations of critical information systems.
•  Work with digital service providers to ensure the security and confiden-

tiality of consumer data.

•  Establish  a  cybersecurity  incident  reporting  platform  to  ensure  a  rapid, 

coordinated response in the event of a threat.

66

67

s
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
C

68

69

 
c)

Plural 
Harmony

70

71

Plural 
Harmony

74
EQUITABLE GROWTH
We are aiming for economic growth that leaves no one behind. We will invest 
in sustainable and innovative projects to reduce social and economic inequali-
ties while preserving the environment.
76
THE FUTURE OF YOUTH
We  are  committed  to  providing  opportunities  for young  people  to  thrive  by 
investing  in  innovative  educational  programmes  and  facilitating  their  active 
participation in decision-making.
80
QUALITY EDUCATION FOR ALL  
Education is an essential pillar of an enlightened and prosperous society. Our 
movement seeks to ensure equitable access to high-quality education across 
Europe by improving education systems and supporting lifelong learning.
82
CULTURAL WEALTH AND DIVERSITY
Cultural diversity is celebrated and preserved as a source of strength. Our par-
ty will encourage cultural exchanges and support artistic initiatives to foster 
an environment where everyone can flourish while contributing to collective 
wealth.
84
MEDIA AND PLURALISM 
Democracy relies on a free and diverse media. We will defend the indepen-
dence  of  the  media  and  continue  to  fight  disinformation,  supporting  quality 
journalism and guaranteeing access to balanced information for all.
86
SPORT AND ETHICS 
The value of sport is recognised as a catalyst for unity, health and inspiration. 
We will encourage access to sport for all, invest in quality sports facilities and 
support athletes, creating a space where everyone can participate and celebra-
te the values of fair play.

65/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

72

73

EQUITABLE 
GROWTH

We  recognise  the  importance  of  small  and  medium-sized  enter-
prises (SMEs) in the European economy, and we obviously wish to 
support them in their growth and development. We will also imple-
ment policies to encourage innovation, simplify administrative pro-
cedures and facilitate access to funding. 
SMEs  must  be  supported  by  financing  opportunities  to  stimulate 
economic  growth  and  foster  innovation,  and  local  and  regional 
economies will be strengthened.
The protection of workers and economic stability are also priorities, 
including aligning social security systems to facilitate the mobility of 
workers and a more flexible labour market.
We also want to highlight the diversification of production chains, 
corporate social responsibility, the digitisation of the economy and 
a truly unified European market for goods and services. 
We will  encourage  a  responsible  fiscal  policy while  supporting  in-
vestments in key sectors, the creation of quality jobs, and construc-
tion of a long-term sustainable economy.

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

PROMOTE A CIRCULAR AND VIRTUOUS ECONOMY
•  Put in place policies that encourage innovation, im-
prove sales markets, simplify administrative proce-
dures, support participation in tenders and projects 
for SMEs and promote access to funding.

•  Support  the  diversification  of  production  chains 

and corporate social responsibility.

•  Encourage fair and sustainable business practices. 
•  Create  a  truly  unified  European  market  for  goods 

and services.

•  Guarantee worker protection and tax fairness.

A RESILIENT AND SUSTAINABLE BANKING SECTOR 
•  Support  for  SMEs  is  at  the  heart  of  the  European 

economy.

•  Provide  funding  opportunities  to  stimulate  eco-

nomic growth and encourage innovation.

•  Strengthen  local  and  regional  economies  by  sup-

porting regional banks.

•  Avoid monopoly structures in the banking sector.

74

75

THE FUTURE 
OF YOUTH

We  are  convinced  that  every  young  per-
son  should  have  the  means  to  succeed  and 
achieve  their  potential  without  being  ham-
pered  by  social,  economic  or  geographical 
obstacles. Hence why we propose a tangible 
and  effective youth  policy  for  the  EU which 
will provide them with a solid foundation, for 
example in education, business creation and 
housing. 
We are convinced that young people should 
have  access  to  high-level  education  that  is 
open  to  the  world,  that  rivals  the  greatest 
American  and  Asian  universities,  and  that 
prepares them for jobs in the labour market. 
We will be committed to offering young peo-
ple a European civic education, allowing them 
to feel like fully European citizens and engage 
in the democratic process.
We are convinced that young people should 
be  heard  in  the  democratic  process  and  be 
able to present their visions and ideas. 
Finally, we believe that the mobility of young 
people must be an integral part of all curric-
ula, from secondary to higher education, and 
that their diplomas and qualifications must be 
automatically recognised. 
Our party is also concerned about the mental 
health  of  young  people,  particularly  in  view 
of the omnipresence of social networks, and 
we  plan  to  introduce  concrete  measures  to 
protect  them.  Thus,  to  preserve  and  devel-
op these healthy minds, we propose creating 
a  “StartEU”  programme  that  would  provide 
them with the financial and logistical resourc-

es necessary to carry out their projects. 
We also believe that civic engagement is im-
portant  for  young  people,  and  we  propose 
creating  a  European  civic  service  to  enable 
them  to  contribute  to  projects  of  public  in-
terest  in  different  European  countries  and 
strengthen  their  sense  of  belonging  to  Eu-
rope.
Finally, to strengthen their sense of belonging 
to  Europe  and  promote  mutual  understand-
ing, we will offer young people more rail trav-
el in Europe, mobility in general and access to 
cultural activities. 
Naturally,  our  movement  will  continue  to 
make it easier for young people to access in-
ternships and job opportunities within Euro-
pean institutions. This will help develop their 
professional  skills  and  understanding  of  the 
European Union’s inner workings.

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

DIGITAL
• 

Increase mental health protection among young people, particularly with regard to social 
networks.

•  Define a legal digital age and set up a European mental health hotline to ensure rapid tre-

• 

atment.
Introduce automatic parental controls to protect young people from inappropriate content 
on the internet. 

TOOLS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE  
•  Create a ”StartEU” programme to give young people a good start in life.
•  Provide the financial and logistical resources to carry out their studies, set up a business or 

find a home. 

EUROPEAN CIVIC SERVICE
•  Enable young people to gain experience and develop skills while contributing to projects 

that benefit society. 

•  Encourage European volunteering, with a particular emphasis on the European Solidarity 
Corps, which encourages exchanges and promotes the Union’s social model and values.

RAIL TRAVEL IN EUROPE 
•  Help  young  people  to  discover  other  cultures  and  connect  with  people  from  different 
countries, strengthen the sense of European belonging and foster mutual understanding.

 ACCESS TO INTERNSHIPS AND EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
•  Give young people the opportunity to develop professional skills in an international en-

vironment and better understand how the EU works.

•  Prohibit  unpaid  internships  and  guarantee  quality  internships  for  young  people,  paying 

particular attention to people from disadvantaged backgrounds.
•  Consider alleviating income tax for employees under the age of 25.

76

77

Youth

78

79

QUALITY EDUCATION 
FOR ALL 

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

•  Multiply Erasmus+ resources tenfold. 
•  Develop a strategy of excellence and innovation for 

European university alliances. 

•  Fight «brain drain».
•  Transform certain professions to meet the demands 

of the ecological transition.
Introduce shared skills for European citizenship education.

• 
•  Strengthen the sense of belonging to Europe.
•  Create a mechanism for the recognition of diplomas and qualifications common 

to the countries of the European Union.

•  Facilitate the mobility of students and workers and encourage the circulation of 

skills and talent throughout the EU. 

•  Develop cross-border cooperation in education and training.
•  Promote a European strategy for vocational training that includes the principles 
of predictivity and connection with productive sectors to prepare specialists for 
the new jobs associated with digital and green transitions.

such  as  the  automotive  or  fossil  fuel  indus-
tries, to retrain. We can certainly achieve this 
by  working  closely  with  employers,  workers’ 
organisations and governments.
We  will  do  everything  to  ensure  that  diplo-
mas  and  qualifications  are  recognised  in  EU 
countries, and we will facilitate the mobility of 
students and workers. 
Finally, we will develop cross-border cooper-
ation in education and training to meet labour 
needs in critical sectors (healthcare, tourism, 
industry, etc.). By doing so, we can tackle the 
labour market challenges and ensure we have 
enough  skilled  workers  to  support  Europe’s 
future.

Quality education for all is at the heart of our 
priorities.  We  also  plan  to  significantly  in-
crease funding for the Erasmus+ programme 
dedicated to young people in apprenticeships 
or  vocational  training,  multiplying  it  tenfold. 
This  aims  to  cultivate  a  sense  of  belonging 
to Europe while helping young people devel-
op  their  skills,  gain valuable  experience,  and 
broaden their horizons. 
To this end, we will increase the budget allo-
cated to the Erasmus+ programme tenfold for 
young people in apprenticeships or vocation-
al  training  to  help  them  develop  their  skills, 
experience and open-mindedness. 
We  are  also  firmly  convinced  that  we  must 
increase the representation of girls and wom-
en  in  scientific  studies  and  careers.  We  will 
develop  mentoring  and  awareness-raising 
programmes  and  build  real  professional  net-
works.
At the same time, given the demands of the 
ecological  transition,  we  believe  investing  in 
lifelong  learning,  retraining,  and  professional 
reorientation is vital. We must help all those 
working in sectors undergoing rapid change, 

80

81

CULTURAL WEALTH 
AND DIVERSITY 

We will implement a European cultural pass-
port  to  give  all  young  Europeans  access  to 
free or discounted cultural assets throughout 
Europe. By developing a strategy for protect-
ing and enhancing regional heritage, we want 
to  preserve  local  traditions  and  strengthen 
social cohesion.
Finally, we will develop a dynamic strategy for 
European  video  games  and  consolidate  the 
recognition of sports at the professional and 
amateur levels. This approach should nurture 
and stimulate European talent while promot-
ing  collective values  such  as  team  spirit  and 
sports ethics.

In the face of the rise of extremism and cul-
tural  isolationism,  phenomena  that  threaten 
the  social  cohesion  of  the  European  Union, 
we  will  invest  in  promoting  cultural  and  ar-
tistic  diversity,  supporting  European  artists, 
preserving European cultural heritage and en-
couraging talent.
Multilingualism will be at the heart of our vi-
sion for Europe (*), and we are determined to 
ensure  it  has  enough  financial  support.  We 
will  promote  cultural  and  linguistic  diversity 
to ensure an inclusive society. This will include 
support for minority languages and stimulat-
ing cultural and artistic cooperation between 
nations within the European Union.
And although the budget devoted to culture 
currently represents only 0.2% of the Europe-
an budget, we hope to multiply this figure by 
10. 
We will also create a European statute for art-
ists  guaranteeing  them  recognition,  mobility 
and access to social rights. We are convinced 
that a European strategy to protect strategic 
cultural assets can preserve Europe’s cultural 
heritage for future generations. 

(*)  Report  by  Christian  Lequesne  entitled  “Diversité  Linguistique  et  langue  française  dans  les  institutions  eu-
ropéennes (Linguistic Diversity and the French Language in the European Institutions)” (2021).

15/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

•  Multiply the budget allocated to culture by 10.
•  Standardise multilingualism in the communication of European institu-

tions.

•  Ensure that all official digital content complies with a regulatory obliga-

tion to respect multilingualism.

•  Promote agreements with major technology companies so that search 
engines,  algorithms  and  browsers  do  not  discriminate  based  on  lan-
guage when users in minority languages make queries.
•  Promote linguistic diversity, especially regional languages.
•  Support minority languages.
• 

Include in the eligible actions of the Creative Europe Programme and 
the pro-digitalisation initiatives of the recovery and resilience plan sup-
port for the development of all types of platforms for the production, 
grouping and dissemination of content in minority or regional languages 
that contribute to the strengthening and development of a digital iden-
tity  for  these  cultures.  Ensure  their  presence  on  major  content  plat-
forms.

•  Ensure sufficient funding for regional language translations as part of 

Creative Europe.

•  Create a framework for a European status for artists and guarantee re-

cognition, mobility and access to social rights.

•  Preserve the sustainability of all artistic and cultural expressions.
•  Protect our heritage and strategic cultural assets.
•  Prevent the takeover of our major players. 
•  Strengthen European cultural identity.
•  Offer a European passport and give access to free or discounted Euro-

pean cultural assets and shows. 

•  Promote the cultural mobility of young Europeans.

82

83

MEDIA AND 
PLURALISM

In  a  growing  political  and  economic  pressure 
climate, we believe that all citizens should have 
access  to  free  and  independent  information. 
Freedom of the press is essential to any dem-
ocratic society.
To ensure a more balanced and democratic me-
dia environment, we are committed to monitor-
ing media mergers and acquisitions, protecting 
media diversity and strengthening media trans-
parency in accordance with the European Me-
dia Freedom Act.
With the advent of social networks and online 
media, we will strengthen citizens’ civic educa-
tion and media skills to help them develop crit-
ical thinking.
Recognizing that the digital transition can lead 
to  abuse  and  discrimination,  we  are  commit-
ted to adapting regulations to protect person-
al  data,  combat  cybercrime  better  and  ensure 
equal access to digital technologies for all.
We want to continue fighting against disinfor-
mation and false information online to ensure 
that  European values  and  democratic  systems 
are protected.

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

ENSURING FREEDOM AND PLURALISM
•  Protect  journalists  against  any  form  of  intimidation  or  violence.  In 
addition, denouncing and combating job insecurity in the sector are 
two main tools to limit freedom of expression.

•  Promote media diversity and freedom and respect for press freedom, 

which are key elements of any democratic society. 

•  Avoid  excessive  concentrations  and  monopolistic  practices  in  ac-

cordance with the European Media Freedom Act. 

•  Guarantee citizens access to free and independent information. Pro-

tect the independence of public media services. 

•  Apply the Strengthened Code of Practice on Disinformation – a wide 

range of players have signed up to combat disinformation.

CIVIC EDUCATION AND MEDIA SKILLS 
•  Enable citizens to understand the issues related to the media and to 

develop critical thinking.

•  Educate  fellow  citizens  so  that  they  can  discern  facts  from  fiction, 

and recognise fake news on social networks.
•  Ensure equal access to digital technologies for all. 

SUPPORT FOR LOCAL, REGIONAL AND EUROPEAN PRESS
•  Encourage  the  digitisation  of  newspapers  and  greater  coverage  of 

European issues.

•  Promote European and cross-border media, such as ARTE.

84

85

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS

honesty  and  solidarity.  These  values  are  not 
merely  concepts  but  concrete  elements  that 
will frame our efforts for a fulfilled and dyna-
mic youth.
Finally,  collaboration  and  mutual  respect  will 
be  the  central  pillars  of  a  united  Europe  we 
want to build. We will work collectively to re-
fine the social skills of young people through 
group activities, competitions and events. We 
are convinced this will strengthen interperso-
nal ties and create the outlines of a united and 
cohesive Europe.
By redoubling our efforts and embracing this 
approach, we will  shape  the  new  face  of  Eu-
rope. This face will reflect our commitment to 
youth, equality, vitality and values.

•  Promote  participation  in  sport  for  all young  people,  regardless  of  origin  or 

physical ability.

•  Multiply opportunities for all and strengthen social integration.
•  Offer suitable equipment with specific programmes for particular needs.
• 

Integrate educational programmes to promote ethical values such as loyalty, 
respect, honesty and solidarity.

•  Raise awareness of social and environmental issues through educational ini-

tiatives.

•  Define and promote a European model of sport and add European flags and 
national flags at international European competitions, including the Olympic 
Games in France this year. 

•  Ensure respect for the fundamental freedoms and principles of the EU, par-
ticularly  equality,  in  professional  sport  and  promote  the  development  of 
women’s competitions.  

•  Develop a strategy for European video games. 
•  Contribute to the development of a European creative economy and the pro-

motion of e-sports.

•  Promote new governance for European football and reform of UEFA.

SPORT AND 
ETHICS

The  importance  of  grassroots  sport  in  Euro-
pean society is at the heart of our vision. We 
consider the development of sport for young 
people  as  a  cornerstone,  but  we  will  also 
pay  particular  attention  to  seniors.  We  aim 
to  create  an  environment  that  is  respectful, 
inclusive  and  conducive  to  health  for  all  our 
fellow  citizens,  regardless  of  their  origin,  age 
or  physical  condition.  This  will  not  only  help 
to promote the physical and mental health of 
everyone but also strengthen the social fabric 
of our communities.
We will focus on creating spaces for integra-
tion  and  equity.  How  do  we  aim  to  achieve 
this  in  practice?  By  ensuring  access  to  sui-
table equipment and developing specific pro-
grammes that meet individual needs. This ap-
proach  will  be  based  on  our  conviction  that 
equal  opportunities  must  be  a  concrete  and 
non-negotiable  reality  in  the  Europe  we  are 
building.
The  well-being  of  young  people  are  at  the 
heart  of  our  concerns;  we  are  committed  to 
promoting healthy lifestyles. Our varied range 
of physical activities and our wider dissemina-
tion of knowledge on the impact of nutrition, 
sleep and hygiene will be concrete steps in rai-
sing awareness of the importance of physical 
and mental well-being from a young age.
Our  actions  will  also  be  inspired  by  funda-
mental ethical values. Through enriching edu-
cational  programmes  and  awareness-raising 
initiatives, we will encourage loyalty, respect, 

86

87

d)

Vibrant 
Regions

88

89

Vibrant 
Regions

92
REGIONAL PROGRESS AND PROSPERITY
Our  regional  investments will  strengthen  economic,  social  and  cohe-
sion in Europe. We will prioritise the fundamental objectives of this po-
licy: reduce disparities between regions, promote balanced economic 
growth and eliminate obstacles to cross-border regional cooperation.  

THRIVING OUTERMOST REGIONS  
We will support innovation, entrepreneurship, and sustainability in Ou-
termost  regions  while  simplifying  administrative  procedures  and  im-
proving  connectivity  to  strengthen  their  economic  development  and 
improve the quality of life of their inhabitants..

PRIORITY ACTIONS

94 35/300

90

91

REGIONAL PROGRESS 
AND PROSPERITY

The European Union’s Cohesion Policy is a powerful and fundamental tool for combating re-
gional disparities. Through our regional investment strategy, we want to strengthen economic, 
social and regional cohesion across Europe.
Our  commitment  has  already  been  reflected  in  creating  a  network  of  European  democratic 
mayors. And, thanks to the “EU Councillors” network that our Renew Europe group supports 
within the Committee of the Regions, we will continue to mobilise our efforts to bring Europe 
closer to its citizens. 
To speed up this cohesion policy, we will be focusing on three key objectives: 

• Remove obstacles to cross-border cooperation
• Reduce regional disparities
• Promote harmonious economic growth

Today, 150 million cross-border citizens reside within the European Union’s borders and face 
daily bureaucratic obstacles that limit their ability to take full advantage of the EU’s opportuni-
ties for development and cooperation. We will therefore fully support the BRIDGE-EU (Border 
Regency Initiative for Development and Growth in Europe) programme.
With this in mind, our approach will consist of supporting tangible regional initiatives to com-
bat climate change and preserve our environment. We will provide local councillors with the 
means to create user-friendly spaces in cities and villages. Our approach will include, for exam-
ple, promoting pedestrian areas, increasing bicycle sharing and developing cycle paths to bring 
communities closer together.
Expanding and improving public transport networks in urban, rural and outermost areas will 
also be essential. We will work to improve intermodality to facilitate cross-border travel. By 
developing efficient and well-connected transport infrastructure, we will simplify citizens’ jour-
neys and promote economic  integration. This approach will  facilitate exchanges, strengthen 
trade relations and support tourism development.
The Committee of the Regions needs the necessary resources to develop from a simple advi-
sory body to a communicative player. We want it to become capable of assessing the regional 
impact of European legislation on the regions and supporting EU legislators in applying the “do 
no harm to EU cohesion” principle.
Our commitment will also include simplifying the EU funding process by reducing bureaucracy 
to enable regional and local authorities to quickly implement sustainable projects such as dig-
ital infrastructure, public spaces and economic development initiatives.

10/300

PRIORITY ACTIONS
OPPORTUNITIES
• 

Implement  the  BRIDGE-EU  (Border  Regency  Initiative  for  Development  and  Growth  in 
Europe) programme and promote macro-regions.

•  Encourage the exchange of local good practices at the European Union level, provide con-
crete evidence to European Union decision-makers, and use artificial intelligence to facili-
tate access to European funds.

•  Support  the  development  of  the  European  Committee  of  the  Regions’  “EU  Councillors” 
network, which can help strengthen the connection between the Union and its citizens.

INFRASTRUCTURE 
• 

Improve intermodality to facilitate cross-border travel, and introduce in the Revision of the 
Schengen Borders Code the obligation for States to carry out and examine impact studies 
on trade and relations in cross-border areas before taking any decision on the reintroduc-
tion of controls.

•  Defend the mission of Cohesion Policy to ensure that it is not jeopardised by the redirec-

tion of funds to crisis management. 

•  Facilitate regional and local authorities’ access to European Union funding by, for example, 

reducing or eliminating national bureaucracy in the EU funding process. 

ENERGY
•  Support regional authorities with the expansion of renewable energy.
•  Promote participatory initiatives for cooperative energy production.

CLIMATE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
• 

Increase the number of car-free streets and push for other measures to make cities and 
villages  more  people-friendly,  such  as  bike-sharing  systems,  pavements  and  cycle  lanes, 
and lower speed limits. 

DIGITALISATION
• 

Invest in the digital transformation of regional and local public administrations, allowing 
public services to be retained in rural areas.

92

93

 
 
 
THRIVING 
OUTERMOST REGIONS

strengthening the managing authorities’ skills, 
and  promoting  better  coordination  between 
the  various  players  involved.  In  addition,  we 
will put forward measures to make European 
citizenship  a  reality  by  strengthening  educa-
tion and encouraging regional integration. 
Because the future of the European Union lies 
with its young people, we will be mustering all 
available  resources  to  promote  training,  mo-
bility and, therefore, the emancipation of the 
outermost regions. By applying the European 
strategy  to  combat  brain  drain,  these  young 
people  will  be  ready  to  take  on  future  chal-
lenges and play their part in the development 
of  the  outermost  regions.  Of  course,  to  pro-
mote  connectivity  and  digital  development, 
we will support constructing a high-speed in-
ternet network. 
Lastly, we will  propose  solutions  for  fair  rep-
resentation  of  the  outermost  regions  within 
the Committee of the Regions to ensure that 
their  interests  and  concerns  are  fully  consid-
ered in European decision-making.

The  green  transition  offers  an  unprecedent-
ed  development  opportunity  for  the  outer-
most regions, and we are convinced that they 
have immense potential to become innovation 
hubs.
We believe it is essential to develop a strong 
entrepreneurial  dynamic  by  encouraging  the 
creation of companies, supporting local entre-
preneurs and promoting innovation. For exam-
ple, in Mayotte, where the unemployment rate 
is as high as 30%, one of the highest in Europe, 
we want the region to be on a course of en-
dogenous development and do everything we 
can to stimulate the economy.
In addition, we will invest in local production 
to  develop  agricultural  practices  that  respect 
the  environment. The  outermost  regions  will 
thus strengthen their food security and reduce 
their dependence on imports.
Tourism  is,  of  course,  an  essential  sector  for 
the outermost regions. We will support its de-
velopment  with,  once  again,  innovative,  sus-
tainable and durable investments.
We are committed to supporting the econom-
ic  development  of  the  outermost  regions  by 
maximising the impact of European funds and 
programmes while meeting the specific needs 
of each region. 
We want to strengthen the economies of the 
outermost regions and improve the quality of 
life of their inhabitants. To achieve this, we pro-
pose  simplifying  administrative  procedures, 

PRIORITY ACTIONS25/300

ECONOMY
•  Develop the entrepreneurial dynamic in the outermost regions by mobilising the availa-
ble European funds and programmes, particularly the European Social Fund (ESF+).

•  Achieve autonomy in terms of food self-sufficiency.
•  Set  up  social  free-trade  zones  throughout  the  outermost  regions  to  boost  purchasing 

power, combat unemployment, encourage recruitment and develop skills.

•  Regulate air transport with agreements on intra-Community airport taxes for European 
carriers  to  reduce  consumer  fares  and  strengthen  European  territorial  continuity with 
direct links to other European countries.

•  Raise awareness of and develop schemes that provide funding for young Europeans to 

set up new businesses in specific areas of local development.

•  Establish more flexible state aid schemes for outermost regions, particularly in the agri-

cultural and territorial continuity and energy transition sectors.

•  Develop tourism with  innovative,  sustainable  and  durable  investments  to support the 

sustainable development of this strategic sector for the outermost regions.

GREEN TRANSITION
•  Turn outermost regions into climate solutions testing grounds, drawing on their exper-

tise in dealing with climate change, their rich biodiversity and their resources.

•  Create an Energy Performance Diagnostic adapted to outermost regions and develop re-
newable energy solutions adapted to each outermost region (solar, geothermal, biomass, 
tidal power, wind, etc.).

•  Protect research using soil species with patents. The species are endemic, and the pat-
ents will generate local financial benefits, attracting new investments and giving Europe-
an laboratories priority access to their patents.

•  Take outermost regions into account when implementing the European Union Solidarity 
Fund to fund risk prevention measures in the face of natural disasters and promote the 
exchange of knowledge between outermost regions and their regional neighbours.
•  Raise awareness of the “EU Cities” mission to promote collaboration, through the ex-
change of good practices and twinning, between the cities of the outermost regions to 
develop the “Smart Cities” network by 2033. 

•  Promote education programmes on the European Union’s green skills to raise awareness 
of  the value  and  impact  of  sustainable  choices  for  the  economic  development  of  the 
regions. 

94

95

USE OF EUROPEAN FUNDS
•  Ensure the full use of European funds, strengthen the relationship between project lead-
ers and fund managers and simplify the procedures for European funds and programmes, 
which is detrimental to their proper implementation. 

•  Make every effort to train the competent people in the managing authorities of the out-

ermost regions.

•  Launch  twinning  programmes  between  administrations,  particularly  those  responsi-
ble for European funds, and develop the mobility of civil servants and citizens to raise 
awareness of the EU. 

•  Launch twinning programmes on EU administration, policy development and the man-

agement of European funds. 

STRENGTHENING EUROPEAN CITIZENSHIP
•  Deploy European Commission liaison offices and ‘Maisons de l’Europe’ in the outermost 

regions to create points of exchange and contact on location.

•  Develop twinning to promote mobility and raise awareness of the EU.
• 

Introduce a European identity card and passport; freedom of movement of funds (with 
safeguards, of course) and facilities for living and working in Europe.

EDUCATION
•  Maintain the level of investment in school infrastructure, building and renovating schools, 
improving reception conditions for pupils, putting an end to school rotation in primary 
education, and welcoming all children of school age by strengthening facilities for phys-
ical education.

•  Encourage the development of high-quality teaching and educational projects with the 

support of Erasmus+.

•  Create  a  European  University  of  the  Caribbean  to  raise  Europe’s  profile  in  the  French 
Antilles and French Guiana and encourage the emergence of a centre of excellence for 
research, particularly into the effects of climate change, the preservation of biodiversity, 
such as the mangroves, and the fight against sargassum.

•  Develop  a  genuine  language  policy  by  promoting  multilingualism  from  primary  school 

onwards through language exchanges in each regional area and towards Europe.

DIGITAL TRANSITION
•  Develop the ultra-high-speed internet network, renew submarine cables and deploy sat-

ellites.

•  Define an action plan to offer a high-quality network connection for all by imposing a 

maximum price.

96

97

Thank you

98

99

 democrats.eu

facebook.democrats.eu

twitter.democrats.eu

instagram.democrats.eu

Produced with the financial support of the European Parliament. The opinions expressed are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the European Parliament.

