EFA 2024 European Election Manifesto

Approved by the EFA Bureau 22/09/2023 
Ratified in the EFA Congress 13/10/2023

1

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoWE SEEK
TO BUILD

A EUROPE

2

EFA — 2024 European election manifesto

The  European  Free  Alliance 
FOREWORD
(EFA) is the only European po-
litical party that stands for self-determination 
as its foundational principle. We are an alliance 
of 41 parties representing stateless nations, 
regions and minorities across Europe. We 
stand for human, civil and political rights, the 
principle of subsidiarity, and cultural and lin-
guistic diversity. We do not allow fundamental 
rights and freedoms to be eroded or attacked. 
We believe European democracy should be-
come more assertive and resilient. Together 
with the rule of law and the EU fundamental 
rights and freedoms, democracy constitutes 
the bedrock of European society. We seek to 
build a Europe for all peoples, nations, mi-
norities and regions – not only the powerful 
centralised states and their majority interests.

In June 2024, European voters will choose 
the direction for the EU for the next five years. 
Those five years will be turbulent and uncer-
tain, and there will be many challenges that we 
will have to face as a continent. But they will 
also provide an opportunity to reshape the EU 
to better reflect its true diversity, and to give 
voice to all its peoples.

Since the last European elections in 2019, 
there have been huge developments that 
have impacted the life of every European. A 
global pandemic forced us into lockdown, with 
accompanying economic and social crises. 
The United Kingdom has withdrawn from the 
EU. The Qatargate and Moroccogate corrup-
tion scandals have shaken public trust in EU 
politicians, while the Pegasus revelations have 
shown the extent to which states are spying 
on their political ene mies. And above all, full-
scale war has returned to the continent with 
the Russian Federation’s brutal invasion of 
Ukraine.

In each case, the response was at least partly 
a European one. European-level solutions are 
the appropriate response to global challenges. 

But every part of Europe has its own unique 
needs, and a centralising Union will be doomed 
to fail both in understanding and providing for 
the needs of its citizens. For EFA, democracy 
and decentralisation must go hand in hand.

For now, the EU’s own democracy is incom-
plete. Its inability to respond to some Euro-
pean nations’ push for self-determination has 
shown this dramatically. Is the EU a real union 
of its citizens, or merely a club of states? This 
question will not go away no matter how in-
convenient it is for established state interests. 
On the contrary: Europe’s citizens and peoples 
are finding their voice, and they demand to 
be heard.

In June 2024 they have an opportunity to raise 
that voice. But it won’t be enough to simply 
give another mandate to the mainstream po-
litical forces that have missed every opportu-
nity to enact real change in Europe. To make 
the European Union able to give voice to all 
its citizens, there is an urgent need for every 
people, territory and minority community to 
be empowered.

We want to see a strong, decisive and effec-
tive Union. One which focuses on the powers 
that deliver a better Europe, which generates 
added value, and which is built from the bot-
tom up.

We collaborate together at the EU level when 
it generates added value. Other competences 
should stay at the local democracy level. The 
EU’s unique blend of intergovernmentalism 
and its European-level community approach 
is its strength. That is what EFA stands for: a 
political model that truly reflects its peoples 
and their interests. One that can give them 
representation, empowerment and hope.

We want a Europe that works for all.

EFA — 2024 European election manifesto

3

RECOGNITION OF THE DEMOCRATIC RIGHT 
TO SELF-DETERMINATION.

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT MUST HAVE 
THE RIGHT TO INITIATE LEGISLATION.

REFORM FOR THE EUROPEAN COMMITTEE 
OF THE REGIONS TO BE ABLE TO INFLUENCE 
AND AMEND EUROPEAN LEGISLATION.

This election is a turning point for Europe. Its 
results will determine the future direction of 
a whole continent – for better or for worse. It 
is essential that everybody is involved in that 
decision.

But currently the EU only allows for a few 
voices to be heard. EFA has always believed 
that the European project must be based on 
the diversity of its peoples: it can no longer 
content itself as being a union of centralising 
states promoting their own interests. Certain 
voices – like those of nations and minorities 
that do not have their own state – are frozen 
out of this state-focused system. And ulti-
mately, the EU is only as democratic as its 
member states – many of which are incapable 
or unwilling to grant proper representation to 
their citizens’ wishes.

We need a very different Europe: one that al-
lows for new states, new structures, and new 
ways of involving minorities and voices which 
are currently excluded. We need the readiness 
and ambition to envision a new Europe.

Above all, that must involve the recognition 
of the democratic right to self-determination. 
That right, enshrined in international law, al-
lows all peoples to choose their own future 
and an institutional framework that empowers 
them. That includes the recognition of their 
linguistic and cultural rights, respect for the 
principle of subsidiarity, increased autonomy 
or independence. We support all democratic 
and peaceful means to pursue those goals. 

Y
C
A
R
C
O
M
E
D

4

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoIn those cases where achieving these rights 
within existing state frameworks turns out to 
be impossible due to state blockages, the EU 
should be able to take up a role in seeking a 
compromise. EFA Members of the European 
Parliament have been among those who have 
worked on and presented a legislative pro-
posal for an EU regulation for exactly this1. It 
provides a blueprint for how the EU can medi-
ate to ensure the rights of peoples to decide 
their own future can be exercised, even when 
the state is opposed. It proves that it is pos-
sible within the current EU competences: no 
Treaty Change is necessary.

In the European Parliament, we seek the re-
moval of all unfair barriers to electoral partici-
pation. Electoral thresholds are used in many 
European countries to deny representation to 
smaller parties – in some cases, a deliberate 

merely an advisory body without real power, 
it should be able to influence and amend Eu-
ropean legislation. 

The President of the European Commission 
must be democratically elected, on the basis 
of a proposal by the European Parliament.

The Qatargate scandal has demonstrated that 
we need more transparency in all the Euro-
pean institutions. There must be zero toler-
ance for corruption. Furthermore, the Pegasus 
revelations have shown that, in some member 
states, governments are illegitimately spying 
on opposition politicians, journalists and oth-
ers. Surveillance in European democracies 
must only happen with judicial oversight, for 
legitimate reasons, and must always comply 
with fundamental rights.

A MORE POWERFUL EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, 
MORE ACCOUNTABLE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, 
AND A STRONGER VOICE FOR ALL.

tactic to exclude national minorities or ter-
ritorial movements. This must be ended, and 
European Parliament constituencies should 
reflect the regional diversity within states. It 
is absurd that large states like Spain or France 
are a single constituency when there is huge 
diversity within them, including stateless na-
tions that are denied political representation. 
These European mega-constituencies must 
be broken down into smaller areas that are 
more in line with local interests and identities.

There are already some instruments 
that citizens can use to address their 
concerns directly to the EU - but they 
are flawed. The European Citizens’ Ini-
tiative (ECI), for example, is a tool that 
allows citizens to submit a petition for 
a legislative proposal if they receive 
one million signatures. However, in many cases 
the Commission has failed to effectively fol-
low up. For example, the refusal of the Com-
mission to act upon the Minority SafePack 
Initiative, despite calls from 3/4 of the Euro-
pean Parliament, several national and regional 
parliaments and governments, is problematic 
from a democratic point of view. The ECI must 
be reformed to deliver on its promise, and the 
Commission should have to make a legislative 
proposal as a result. 

The European Parliament must also have the 
right to initiate legislation. Currently, only the 
European Commission has this right, with the 
result that many proposals are based on tech-
nocratic centralism rather than the needs and 
wishes of Europe’s regions and peoples.

As a counterweight to the influence of the 
member states, and to ensure that all parts 
of Europe have formal representation in the 
EU system, we seek reform for the European 
Committee of the Regions. Rather than being 

Finally, the EU must step up and proactively 
involve young Europeans in the policy-making 
processes. The focus should be on increas-
ing European youth’s access to the political 
system. Furthermore, the Union ought to in-
tegrate a youth perspective across all poli-
cies and levels of government. EFA supports 
the implementation of an ‘EU Youth Test’, as 
proposed by the European Youth Forum2, to 
ensure young people’s concerns and needs 
are systematically considered throughout the 
EU legislative process.

1 
2 

https://selfdeterminationcaucus.eu/selfdetermination_caucus.pdf
https://euobserver.com/health-and-society/157306

5

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoINTRODUCTION A SPECIAL STATUS FOR 
ISLANDS INTO EU LAW.

Europe is far more than its 27 member states. 
It is all the diversity within those states: state-
less nations that have not yet achieved their 
independence; linguistic, historical and cul-
tural minorities living alongside the majority 
populations; historical regions with strong and 
unique identities, and much more.

It is also all the different people who make up 
our societies, of all ethnicities, genders, sexu-
alities, ages and social origins. If European pol-
itics does not include all these different voices, 
it is not truly democratic or truly reflective of 
the communities in which we live. EFA stands 
for the human rights of all Europeans, regard-
less of who they are.

Europe's geography is diverse too. It includes 
densely populated urban areas, and rapidly 
emptying countryside where depopulation 
is a real problem. Each place is unique, and 
there is no one-size-fits-all solution to any 
challenge. The EU legislative process must 
be more transparent and foster greater par-
ticipation from the bottom up. Reliable im-
pact assessments must take due account of 
the impact at national and regional level. It is 
fundamental for EFA that all EU policy must 
recognise the specific needs of each territory 
in its implementation.

This goes especially for locations which face 
particular challenges due to their geography. 
EFA has a special concern for the unique 
needs of Europe's island communities. Islands 
face logistical and infrastructure challenges 
unknown to mainland communities, and must 
not be left behind or disadvantaged. EFA calls 
for a special status for islands to be intro-
duced into EU law, unlocking extra support, 
funding and exceptions to help those who 
live on islands. Other areas that require spe-
cial attention include remote, peripheral and 
mountainous regions, where infrastructure and 
agriculture also face unique challenges. Cross-

Y
T
I
S
R
E
V
I
D

6

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoRIGHT TO USE MANY MORE LANGUAGES 
IN THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, AND 
FOR THE RIGHT FOR EU CITIZENS TO 
WRITE TO THE EU INSTITUTIONS IN 
THEIR MOTHER TONGUE.

ESTABLISHMENT OF A EUROPEAN 
OMBUDSMAN FOR MINORITY RIGHTS.

border regions also have specific needs: EFA 
believes in building a strong cross border 
cooperation mechanism in the EU and with 
neighbouring countries.

The EU institutions currently recognise 24 of-
ficial languages. But the reality is that there 
are hundreds of languages and dialects spo-
ken across the territory of the EU – several 
of which have more speakers than some of 
the recognised EU official languages. The list 
of EU official languages therefore reflects the 
interests and identities of the states, not the 
true linguistic diversity of Europe. EFA stands 
for the right to use many more languages in 
the European Parliament, and for the right for 
EU citizens to write to the EU institutions in 
their mother tongue. This is not impractical nor 
unduly expensive: the European Committee 
of the Regions already has a system allowing 
members to speak in Catalan, Galician, and 
Basque so long as appropriate notice is given.

The EU also needs to respect and protect the 
rights of historical national minorities. Cur-
rently minority rights are left almost entirely 

challenges. None of the Member States is ca-
pable of dealing with these challenges by itself. 
Working together will enable us to put forward 
a common European response. This response 
should be based on humanitarian principles 
and international law, and seek to develop safe 
and legal pathways. 

In recent years, steps towards gender equal-
ity have been made in the EU. But there is still 
a long way until we reach full equality. Fur-
ther legislation regarding women’s empower-
ment and protection has to be developed. To 
achieve it, women need to be heard. In 2022, 
the global share of women in national parlia-
ments reached 26.2% - up from 22.4% in 2015. 
At that pace, it will take another 40 years for 
women and men to be represented equally 
in national parliaments. In the European Par-
liament during the 2019-2024 term, just over 
40% of MEPs were women - still well below 
parity. Addressing this situation would in-
crease the legitimacy of European institutions 
while bridging the democratic gap between 
them and the citizens. It would also improve 
the efficiency and responsiveness of EU poli-

cies, better fitting women's needs. 

EUROPE’S LANGUAGES REPRESENTED, GENDER 
EQUALITY IN THE INSTITUTIONS, AND THE 
SPECIAL NEEDS OF EACH REGION RECOGNIZED.

to the member states, which frequently vio-
late them or refuse to recognise minorities 
at all. EFA proposes to establish a European 
Ombudsman for Minority Rights, who would 
be empowered to investigate member states’ 
compliance with the Charter for Regional and 
Minority Languages and the Framework Con-
vention for the Protection of National Minori-
ties and to issue recommendations.

The refugee and migration flows into Europe 
have placed the Union before unprecedented 

However, we must recognise that the 
underrepresentation of women is not 
only a legal matter, but also a result of 
cultural and social norms that create 
and maintain gender stereotypes. The 
EU, its member states and the media must 
take more action to change mentalities re-
garding the role of women and take action 
against cultural stereotypes.

LGBT rights are another cornerstone of human 
rights. The persecution and demonising of LG-
BTQIA+ people in many parts of Europe goes 
beyond legal discrimination. We condemn 
hate speech on this ground and we consider 
that no discrimination or persecution should 
be allowed.

7

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoFOR CASE-BY-CASE PRAGMATIC 
SOLUTIONS, SUPPORTING FARMERS 
SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES AND 
PROMOTING LOCAL MARKETS.

Y A FLEXIBLE EUROPEAN LAW ALLOWING 
T
I
L
I
B
A
N
I
A
T
S
U
S

The European Commission’s “Green Deal” and 
its Industrial Plan have put it at the forefront of 
a global push for a more environmentally sus-
tainable future, a simpler regulatory framework, 
faster access to funds, enhancing skills and 
improving trade. EFA supports the Green Deal 
in principle, as we must act together to tackle 
climate change. But we are concerned that 
its centralised top-down approach is having 
a disproportionate social and economic im-
pact on certain sectors and regions. Above 
all, we need to preserve the integrity of the 
internal market and the global competitive-
ness of the EU.

A transition is essential to secure our planet, 
but if it does not take the people and busi-
nesses with it, it will inflict suffering and pov-
erty on many communities. For us it is es-
sential that the burden of dealing with the 
environmental crisis does not fall excessively 
on hard-pressed individual citizens and small 
businesses or farmers - and that it is dis-
tributed fairly among Europe's regions. We 
demand special adaptations for small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) and for remote, 
rural or peripheral regions and especially is-

8

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoRECOGNITION OF LANDSCAPE AS PART 
OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE OF 
EUROPE'S PEOPLES.

RENEWABLE AND LOW CARBON 
ENERGY PROJECTS IN HARMONY WITH 
THE LOCAL COMMUNITIES.

lands. Farmers need regulatory clarity, and 
the time and trust to adapt their businesses 
to sustainable models. These policies cannot 
simply be imposed top-down: they need the 
active input and support of farming commu-
nities - those who know the land. Those who 

A JUST TRANSITION THAT LEAVES 
NO COMMUNITY BEHIND.

implement good practice must be rewarded 
for it. European law should be flexible enough 
to allow for case-by-case pragmatic solutions, 
while supporting farmers to adopt sustainable 
practices and promoting local markets.

Europe’s rural strategy should include a strong 
focus on the conservation of nature, biodiver-
sity and the distinctive landscapes of Europe’s 
territories. In many cases landscape forms a 
vital part of our sense of identity and rooted-
ness. EFA wants to recognise landscape as 
part of intangible cultural heritage of Europe’s 
peoples, and ensure that environmental goals 
are consistent with this recognition. We sup-

port the rapid expansion of renewable and 
low carbon energy projects, but they should 
be in harmony with the local communities: 
macro-scale projects have an unacceptable 
impact on the local communities, and even 
cause environmental damage of their own. It 
is possible to provide clean energy discreetly 
and in harmony with local needs.

We support the European Commission's target, 
laid out in the European Green Deal and Indus-
trial Plan, to make Europe the world's first car-
bon-neutral continent by 2050. This should 
help to keep the global temperature increase 
below the 1.5 degree target mentioned in the 
Paris Agreement. However, regions and mu-
nicipalities must have the flexibility to adopt 
their own strategies to achieve these com-
monly agreed targets: objectives identified 
in Brussels can be reached in different ways 
in different parts of Europe, taking account of 
the local needs and opportunities that each 
region knows best. The primary focus should 
be on attaining our existing objectives through 
fair and attainable means.

9

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoTHE EU SHOULD TAKE A PARTICULAR 
ROLE IN STANDING UP FOR THE RIGHTS 
OF MINORITIES WORLDWIDE.

We don't want a Europe that is isolated or 
uninterested in the rest of the world. On the 
contrary, we believe the EU can be a strong, 
independent and influential actor on the world 
stage. The world of tomorrow will be deter-
mined by large power blocs like the USA and 
the enlarged BRICS economies (Brazil, Russia, 
India, China, South Africa and potentially more). 
Only a united and self-confident EU will be 
able to stand up for its own interests against 
these old and new great powers.

Solidarity, peace and democracy should be 
the guiding principles of all EU action in the 
world. EFA wants to see the EU take a particu-
lar role in standing up for the rights of minori-
ties worldwide, and helping other countries to 
build governance structures that allow their 
people to decide their future freely. We want 
to see the remaining non-self-governing ter-
ritories of the world take up their right to self-
determination. We call for a greater EU role in 
supporting the people of Palestine, Kurdistan 
and Western Sahara among others.

Even within the continent Europe itself, there 
are self-determination conflicts that have not 
been resolved. The EU has taken up the re-
sponsibility to mediate in the dispute between 
Kosovo and Serbia. It should do the same be-
tween Armenia and Azerbaijan regarding Na-
gorno-Karabakh, especially now that Azerbai-
jan is forcibly integrating the territory, creating 
a new humanitarian disaster. And within its 
own borders, the EU must not forget that there 
are still democratic questions to answer. In EU 
territories where the people are demanding 

Y
T
I
R
A
D
I
L
O
S

10

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoWE MUST CONTINUE TO PROVIDE AS 
MUCH SOLIDARITY WITH UKRAINE AS 
WE CAN, BUT ALSO TAKE A STRONGER 
ROLE IN THE DIPLOMATIC RESPONSE.

SUPPORT OF UKRAINE'S PATH 
TOWARDS EU ACCESSION, AS WEEL AS 
THAT OF THE WESTERN BALKANS AND 
MOLDOVA.

their right to autonomy or independence (in-
cluding the overseas territories), the EU should 
be able to negotiate with stubborn or unwilling 
member states.

In its immediate neighbourhood, the EU has 
been shaken by the brutal full-scale invasion 
of Ukraine by the Russian Federation, which 
we fully condemn. We must continue to pro-
vide as much solidarity with Ukraine as we can, 
including by providing shelter and support for 

circumstances through coercion or force. We 
categorically reject the Russian State's claim 
to be acting on behalf of Russian-speaking 
peoples: their invasion has caused immense 
suffering to all of Ukraine's peoples, and their 
actions have been in clear violation of inter-
national law. The so-called 'referendums' held 
by gunpoint in Russian-occupied territories 
are in no way a genuine exercise of the right 
to self-determination.

PEACE IN EUROPE AND IN THE WORLD, 
SUPPORT FOR THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF 
EVERYONE, INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO DECIDE.

the millions of people who have been driven 
from their homes by the war. But the EU must 
also take a stronger role in the diplomatic 
response, given that this conflict will not be 
resolved exclusively on military grounds. 

But we must maintain that our dispute is with 
the government of the Russian Federation and 
their political allies, not the people of Russia 
themselves, many of whom are also suffering 
under Putin's dictatorship. When he personally 
stands trial for war crimes, it will be a victory 
for the oppressed peoples of Russia as well 
for Ukraine, Europe and the world.

Ultimately we seek a full withdrawal of Rus-
sian Federation troops from the whole terri-
tory of Ukraine. EFA believes that borders in 
Europe can be changed, but never under any 

We support Ukraine’s path towards EU 
accession, as well as that of the West-
ern Balkans and Moldova. There are 
many reasons – historical, economic, 
and strategic - why these territories 
belong in the EU, and meaningful pro-
gress should be made towards their 
accession. But that process will also require 
genuine commitment to reform and meeting 
European standards among the new members: 
there can be no compromises on EU values 
and democracy, not least regarding minor-
ity rights. Current stateless nations in the EU  
which become independent in a democratic 
manner will also automatically become mem-
bers of the European Union.

The EU must also be sure to never close the 
door on the peoples of the UK. EFA supports 
the right for Scotland and Wales to choose 
their own future: only through independence 
will Scotland, Wales, and England itself (and 
its regions) be able to pursue their own di-
verging interests and meet the aspirations of 
their people.

11

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoDECENTRALIZED DECISION-MAKING, 
AND A GREATER REGIONAL FOCUS ON 
INVESTMENTS STRATEGIES.

No two regions are alike; every place in Europe 
has its own unique needs, strengths and op-
portunities. Yet many of the biggest decisions 
impacting our economic lives are taken from 
above. EFA wants to see decision-making de-
centralised, and a greater regional focus on 
investment strategies. We should build to 
each place's strengths, not apply the same 
formula to all.

Y
T
I
R
E
P
S
O
R
the specific needs of island territories.P

Instead of the centralised distribution of EU 
funds, EFA supports a fairer system of dis-
tributing funding: one where every region of 
Europe can determine its own needs, not have 
decisions imposed on it from above. EU soli-
darity must result in reform and sustainable 
growth on the ground. At the same time, many 
needs that are cross-border in nature can be 
addressed through establishing new econom-
ic and cultural macroregions for areas facing 
common challenges. EFA also stands for an EU 
islands status to provide tailored assistance to 

We should move away from the centralised 
model of an economy that primarily serves 
the interests of large urban areas, and instead 
make sure that every region is treated accord-
ing to its needs and capacities. We should 
improve the local basis of our supply chains, 
helping the development of regional industry 
and creating jobs in rural and peripheral areas. 

12

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoA FAIRER SYSTEM OF DISTRIBUTING 
FUNDING: ONE WHERE EVERY REGION 
OF EUROPE CAN DETERMINE ITS 
OWN NEEDS.

WE WANT TO SEE ALL EU MEMBER 
STATES JOIN THE SCHENGEN ZONE 
SO LONG AS THEY MEET THE (MERIT-
BASED) CONDITIONS.

EFA agrees with the ultimate goal of complet-
ing the Single Market and integrating all parts 
of the EU. But we believe it is possible to do 
so with greater sensitivity for regional needs. 
For example, we want to see all EU member 
states join the Schengen Zone so long as they 
meet the (merit-based) conditions, not only 
because it will facilitate long-distance supply 

A EUROPE THAT FULFILLS ITS ECONOMIC 
PROMISE BY BUILDING TO THE STRENGTHS 
AND CAPACITIES OF EACH INDIVIDUAL PLACE.

chains and delivery times, but also because 
border regions and their communities are cur-
rently split by the Schengen border, impeding 
their economic and cultural lives. 

In today's globalised world, European busi-
nesses have to compete not only locally but 
with producers from all over the world - many 
of which are able to produce more cheaply 
thanks to lower labour costs, lower environ-
mental standards and/or state support. In the 
USA, the Inflation Reduction Act and other 
new protectionist measures are putting the 
squeeze on European exports to the US; at 
the same time, we are locked in competition 
with China, a communist state where all in-
dustry can benefit from state support. Europe 

needs to recognise the changing global mood 
regarding free trade and make strategic public 
investments in European industry to keep it 
competitive. That includes a renewed push 
for diversifying EU trade, more assertive ac-
tion against dumping practices on our market, 
easing conditions for industries and SMEs, the 
introduction of an EU competitiveness check 
and strengthening entire supply chains 
- which often cross borders. That is a 
European-level task by default, but will 
also help to boost local economies.

In all aspects of industrial strategy, Eu-
rope should recognise that it is cur-
rently a world leader in a few sectors: notably 
machinery, biotech, food and drink, tourism, 
transport, and research and development. It 
also has world-renowned ports. These sectors 
should be safeguarded and helped to grow 
sustainably, with a particular focus on build-
ing European competitiveness in key future-
oriented areas: pharma, biotech, emission-free 
vehicles,  hydrogen  storage,  environment-
friendly agriculture, sustainable tourism, and 
key tech components such as semiconduc-
tors and AI. Europe is currently home to the 
most highly-educated, high-skilled workforce 
in the world: this must be nurtured through 
high-level education, R&D investments and 
sensitive industrial policy to preserve our 
place in a rapidly developing world.

13

EFA — 2024 European election manifestoA CALL
TO ACT: FOR 
A EUROPE

14

EFA — 2024 European election manifesto

Every nation and people has its own 
experience of Europe. Our common European 
story is told in many different tongues – far 
more than just the 24 official state languages 
currently recognised by the EU institutions. 
To move forward as a continent, we need 
more voices, political pluralism and territorial 
Self-government for all and everywhere. That 
is what EFA stands for. We cannot make the 
world more secure and certain.

But we can make sure the EU is not held 
back by unworkable establishment interests 
and technocratic centralism. By distributing 
power and influence to all its peoples and 
regions, the EU can begin to act in its citizens’ 
interests – not just a combination of member 
state interests.

Joint us in our movement towards a 
Europe that is truly united in diversity: 
a Europe for all.

EFA — 2024 European election manifesto

15

This material was printed 
with recycled paper

16

EFA — 2024 European election manifesto