As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Dear citizens, dear voters,  

In June 2024, you will make a fundamental decision. You will determine the future of our societies 
and our planet. Your vote will decide which direction the European Union will take in the next five 
years. 

What is at stake is vital. Your choice will decide whether we take shared action to improve our 
quality of life, protect the rights and freedoms that we hold dear, and make Europe a force for peace 
and justice around the world. It is a pivotal moment – the crossroads defining our future.  

We have been through a lot together in the last few years.  

The young people who fought to put the climate crisis on the agenda then lived through the tragic 
pandemic. They missed crucial years of education and their first professional experiences in 
solidarity with society as a whole, even as they knew the difficult future ahead.  

Pensioners and families struggled to heat their homes, after Putin’s war of aggression plunged 
Ukraine into war and Europe into energy crisis.  

Women, LGBTI communities, and racialized groups bore the brunt of growing attacks on rights led 
by the many European governments turning not just to the right but the far right.  

All the while, the incalculable costs of climate inaction continued to mount.  

In such times, many of us feel insecure when we think about today and tomorrow.  

The far right is using these fears to try and drag us back in time. They spread hate while 
scapegoating people who need our support. Their solutions are false solutions. The way to fight the 
powerlessness many of us feel is not to preach resentment, but to listen and offer courage in its 
place.  

The climate crisis is the challenge of our generation. In building a greener society, we will also 
answer the injustice and inequality polarizing our societies. Unlike the conservatives and the far 
right, who want to delay and deny the problems before us, we will act with the full urgency of our 
times. 

The burden of inaction grows heavier by the day. Because just when we know that renewables will 
bring energy bills down, we continue to pay the price of expensive fossil energy.  

Just when we know the effects of toxic pollution on our bodies, they continue to block clean air and 
a safe environment.  

Just when we know that healthy food should be accessible to all, it remains a luxury reserved for the 
few.  

1 

 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Just when we are living through fires and floods, the climate continues to heat up and ecosystems 
teeter on the brink of collapse.  

With us, the sleepwalking stops. We choose change.  

Going from crisis to crisis should not be taken as given. 

Solutions exist. We just need the courage to do what it takes.  

This is why, amid uncertainty and anxiety, we raise a banner of hope and determination.  

To meet the challenges of our time, Europe needs a Green and Social Deal.  

We choose ambition. Our Green and Social Deal will tackle the climate and environmental crisis like 
the emergency it is. We will take the billions going into fossil fuel subsidies and put them into 
renewables, nature, and biodiversity. We will use public money to create a healthier environment for 
us and a liveable future for our children.  

We choose a more secure life. Our Green and Social Deal will fight the cost-of-living crisis by 
investing in the essentials we all need and the public services we all deserve. We will invest in 
affordable housing to bring down rents, home renovations to lower energy bills, and public transport 
to make commuting more affordable. We are convinced that your life can become much less 
expensive day-to-day through simple and smart investment in public services.  

We choose prosperity. Our Green and Social Deal will build a dynamic and competitive economy, 
creating millions of green jobs at the cutting edge of industry. We propose a major investment plan 
to fund green industries and infrastructure across the European Union. The green transition is not 
abstract, it means new rail lines, new factories, new opportunities for you and your community.  

Our Green and Social Deal goes hand in hand with an inclusive and democratic Europe that 
protects the rights of all.  

We choose freedom. We fight for a Europe of democracy, feminism and human rights. Europe is our 
shield. It must legislate to uphold fundamental rights and protect people from discrimination. We will 
not rest until everyone in Europe can live their lives in full self-determination.  

Europe is not an island. Our project for the EU is inseparable from our commitment to working 
internationally to build security, peace, and global justice.  

We choose openness. We will work tirelessly in cooperation with partners to build a fairer world. We 
will stand alongside Ukraine in its struggle for freedom. We will tackle the root causes of conflict and 
injustice, using the EU’s influence and resources to kickstart a Global Green Deal. We are 
convinced that everyone, everywhere deserves a safe, secure, and prosperous future.  

Together, we can achieve this.  

2 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

The Green family is bigger than ever. It is more diverse and more widespread, represented across 
Europe. Greens sit in ministries from Latvia to Spain and city halls from Zagreb to Lyon. Every day, 
we are delivering. We are building solutions. We improve lives and protect our climate and 
environment.  

Now we need to take the next step. The time has come to shape the next majority in the European 
Parliament. The time has come for progress and action. We can build a fairer society and a liveable 
future for our planet.  

We offer an alternative for Europe. Your choice is not between the failed status quo or far-right 
backlash. You have the choice of hope.  

Choose a Green and Social Deal.  
Choose fundamental rights and democracy.  
Choose peace, human rights and global justice.  

Only a strong European Green voice will get us there. Only the Greens will put climate ambition, 
social justice, and protection of fundamental rights and democracy at the heart of the European 
Union.  

History shows that when Europe mobilizes, it can achieve anything. Backed by citizens and 
movements, our approach to politics is simple: offering solutions for today that unlock a brighter 
tomorrow.  

We stand ready, convinced that you are ready too. Together, let us make this Europe a reality.  

Vote Green.  

3 

 
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

CHAPTER I: The Courage to Put Planet and People First – Our Green and Social Deal for 
Europe 

Maria’s electricity bill had never been as high as the previous winter’s. Try paying that on one 
income with two children to feed. She worked hard – too hard if anything – but it was never enough 
at the end of the month. 

She couldn’t have got out of that situation alone, but she wasn’t alone. The council finally opened 
the community childcare centre that they had been promising for years. A Green and Social Deal 
grant then came through and she renovated her draughty house. The new bus route meant she 
wasn’t using half as much petrol each week. 

It turned out that once society treated all our daily struggles as shared problems, together we could 
solve them. With our Green and Social Deal, together we can turn lives like Marias – like ours – into 
more secure, happier, and healthier ones, with cheaper energy bills, healthy food at affordable 
prices, and clean air in our towns and cities. 

Climate justice and social justice are two sides of the same coin.  

Last year was the hottest year on record. The state of the planet is an emergency. The damage to 
lives and livelihoods – the homes flooded and farms bankrupted – caused by the climate crisis gets 
bigger each year.  

We hear the urgent calls of scientists and activists. The animals and ecosystems dying off in record 
numbers cannot wait. 

Climate action now will bring benefits across society, making our lives more affordable and pleasant 
in the years ahead. It will protect the nature that surrounds us. 

Doing nothing will only serve the wealthiest profiting from fossil fuels, while leaving the poorest in 
our societies to bear the costs. 

The living standards of people in Europe have been hit hard over the past few years. The cost of 
living is rising, forcing millions into insecurity with the most vulnerable paying the highest price. 

Growing inequalities and burning economic injustice are not new. For decades, the ultra-rich have 
got away with paying next to no tax, while public services have been cut. 

Jobs have become more precarious and too many people have had to leave the place they call 
home to find decent work. 

None of this has to be normal. None of this is inevitable. 

We have the courage to do what it takes. 

They are our problems, and we need to solve them now. We won’t put it off for the next generation.  

4 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Fighting the cost-of-living crisis and economic inequality while protecting the climate and restoring 
nature will take investment. That is why we are proposing a major investment plan for Europe: the 
Green and Social Deal. 

We will build new green infrastructure and fund quality public services. This economic opportunity 
will create new jobs and industries. 

Everything we put forward combines improving lives with protecting the climate and environment. 

We want toxic air pollution and wasteful fossil fuel subsidies to be things of the past. Tax havens for 
the few have no place in Europe or anywhere. 

Affordable housing, renewable energy, and healthy food for all are what we will fight for. A stable 
climate and restored nature are what we will protect. 

The Green and Social Deal is our plan for a greener, healthier Europe where lives are secure, 
prosperous, and full of opportunity. 

5 

 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Protecting the Climate and the Environment 

Our Green and Social Deal leads the way on climate and environmental justice. The EU’s climate 
and environmental policies set the pace and ambition of action across Europe and beyond. Much 
has been put in motion, we are on a path towards the green transition. Now the question is how to 
accelerate the much-needed action at the same time as protecting living standards, especially for 
the most vulnerable.  

Our societies can only be healthy and secure if we respect planetary boundaries. We are facing the 
consequences of climate change already: more extreme weather events such as storms, droughts, 
and floods, rising sea levels, desertification, and the melting of arctic ice and glaciers. One million 
animal and plant species are perilously close to extinction. The future of our planet and our 
relatively peaceful and prosperous societies depend on us acting now. Protecting the climate and 
environment is about protecting people. 

The green transition towards a socially just and climate neutral Europe bears the promise of 
prosperity. We are working towards a better living environment and well-paid safe jobs in the heart 
of our economies. Instead of paying billions to autocracies for fossil fuels extracted and refined in 
third countries, we can invest this money in the production of renewables, keeping money and jobs 
in Europe, and investing in a better future. 

Tackling the climate emergency 

We stand at a turning point in history. Europe needs to face the climate crisis in its full urgency, 
reducing its emissions as rapidly as possible in line with scientific recommendations to secure the 
most liveable future possible for the years and decades ahead. The EU needs to be a global leader 
on climate if we are to ensure a liveable future for the planet and turn the tide on the increasing 
number of floods, fires and droughts in the EU and worldwide. At the same time, investing in a clean 
European economy and rapidly reducing our dependence on fossil fuels strengthens our economy, 
resilience and security. 

Our work in the European Parliament and the pressure of the climate movement have helped make 
the European Green Deal a reality. We need to continue to strengthen the areas where 
compromises have left gaps and loopholes and raise the level of ambition. Over the last years, 
sceptics, lobbyists, conservatives and populists have tried to pull the breaks on the green transition 
and replace science and progress with misinformation, inefficient policies and continued 
dependency on fossil energy. 

We welcome the late progress but continue to push for more ambition and the full implementation of 
the plans already set in motion. To recognize the climate and environmental crisis, we will push to 
include the right to a healthy and clean environment in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which 
must be directly applicable to all EU citizens. 

Europe can and must take steps to go beyond a 55% reduction in emissions by 2030 and achieve 
full climate neutrality by 2040. These objectives should be set out in a revised EU climate law. We 
must not rely on false solutions such as geoengineering to meet our climate objectives. 

6 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

A transition built on renewables  

We will push the EU to build an energy system for all, based fully on renewables, that connects and 
powers the continent. Renewables are the economic keys to the future. Cheaper and safer than any 
other energy source, renewables helped the EU economy save 100 billion euros between 2021 and 
2023 and bring down energy bills for households. 

We want to transform our energy system to rely 100% on solar, water, wind and geothermal, 
phasing out fossil energy by 2040. Only renewables can ensure a habitable planet, geopolitical 
independence from autocrats, and a resilient and democratically managed energy system. 

We want to put citizens at the heart of the energy transition and replace the current centralized 
system with a highly-efficient, smart and democratic energy system that prioritizes people, economic 
justice and the planet. Citizens should be involved in decision-making processes, for example, 
about the location of energy projects. Energy projects should be developed in ways that minimize 
their impact on nature. We encourage community ownership of renewable energy projects as it 
gives citizens direct decision-making power in them. 

We want solar panels on every roof possible and to promote local solutions such as district heating 
systems, energy storage, EV charging and heat pumps. We also need to accelerate the 
development of a robust electricity grid with improved connectivity and backup to ensure stable 
power – also when the sun does not shine or the wind does not blow. 

Solving the climate crisis will create millions of jobs in sectors from renewables and construction to 
industry and transport. The “shovel ready” projects that we would kickstart tomorrow represent 2 
million jobs in the short and medium term and our long-term transition up to 10 million. 

Ending fossil fuels in Europe 

The EU needs to phase out all fossil fuels by 2040 starting with coal by 2030. The EU needs a clear 
plan for the total phaseout of fossil gas and oil as early as 2035 and no later than 2040. 

We will support massive and accelerated electrification in all sectors and ensuring affordable energy 
for everybody. We need to support the development of cheap electric mobility and charging 
infrastructure. 

It is critical for the climate that we as fast as possible move towards renewable-based heating and 
cooling in homes and industries (such as heat pumps, district heating, waste heat, geothermal – 
and if necessary, sustainably sourced wood and waste biomass). We will provide help for those who 
cannot afford the initial investments to get through the transition and harvest the long-term benefits. 

Suggested alternatives such as green hydrogen come with higher risks and costs for both 
consumers and industry. They should be reserved for backup in the power system, heavy industry, 
long-distance shipping, and flights where electrification is not feasible. 

Europe needs a plan to phase out all fossil fuels subsidies by 2025 at the latest, and all other 
environmentally harmful subsidies by 2027 at the latest. The billions of euros from fossil fuel 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

subsidies must be channelled into renewable energy, energy efficiency and energy savings. No 
European or member state public money should go towards infrastructure that would lock us in a 
fossil system or hamper renewable-based electrification wherever possible. Economic incentives or 
derogations for luxury emissions have no place in a just transition. 

Energy-saving measures to reduce demand are essential. Focusing on demand reduction and 
efficiency means using less and needing less energy – making it easier to green our energy system. 
The energy efficiency measures set out in recent EU legislation, such as introduction of the “energy 
efficiency first principle”, are major achievements. 

Demand reduction should also be achieved through incentives for changes in behaviour, lifestyle 
and collective organisation, in line with social justice. In the transport sector, for example, phasing 
out short-distance air travel when reasonable rail alternatives exist, putting a limit on the weight of 
private cars or developing high-quality rail and bicycle infrastructure would lead to a reduction in 
energy demand.  

Adapting Europe to an overheating planet 

Decades of climate denial and delay have left us vulnerable to extreme weather and the rising anti-
climate backlash will make the situation even worse. Floods and fires have destroyed homes and 
businesses, while heat waves put lives at risk in homes and workplaces. 

To make people and places less vulnerable to climate impacts, we will introduce a climate 
adaptation law grounded on ecosystem-based solutions. 

Nature restoration and climate adaptation efforts will restore water retention in the countryside and 
urban areas through the revitalisation of rivers and floodplains. To recognize the key role of water, 
an integrated approach must mainstream water into all relevant EU policies. 

The green transformation must go hand in hand with a strong cohesion policy to make sure that all 
regions of Europe benefit. Our expanded EU Solidarity Fund will focus on climate adaptation and 
preparedness for natural disasters. Dedicated and direct funding from the EU for climate action can 
relieve budgetary and political pressure on cities and municipalities and allow the transition to be 
shaped and led locally, no matter who is in office at the national level. 

Based on the principle of European solidarity, we will create a European Natural Disaster Fund. We 
will also expand and co-fund the European firefighting fleet, including pooled qualified professional 
and voluntary personnel, firefighting equipment, assets, and firefighting planes, as well as near-real-
time monitoring and an emergency coordination centre. Strengthening civil protection will make 
Europe more resilient to climate disasters. 

Zero-pollution is about health 

A zero-pollution European Union with policies targeting air, water and land pollution will be a much 
healthier place to live. Air pollution is responsible for 300,000 premature deaths each year in the EU 
with children most vulnerable to the effects of fine particulate matter. We will push the EU to 
increase air quality standards for everyone, everywhere in the EU with no exceptions. 

8 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

By 2030, air quality in the EU must meet World Health Organization guidelines. We will fight for a 
toxic-free Europe by 2030 by phasing out the use of the most harmful chemicals through a stronger 
chemicals law. 

The climate crisis is also a severe threat to human health, seen in the effects that heat waves, 
droughts and other extreme weather events have on the general population. Reducing emissions 
now will help avoid a worsening situation in the years ahead. 

Bringing nature back 

From the birds and the bees to the moors and wetlands, we need to protect nature that is the basis 
for life on this planet. One million species are threatened with extinction linked to damaged 
ecosystems, pesticide use, and climate change. This mass extinction must stop.  

From 2026, 10% of the EU budget must be spent on biodiversity objectives. Taking action against 
climate change and restoring healthy, biodiversity-rich ecosystems are two sides of the same coin. 

We want to protect one-third of the EU’s territory and marine areas, so we can live in harmony with 
nature, including wetlands, forests, marine, agro-ecosystems, rivers, and lakes. We want to build a 
Trans-European Network for Nature that connects ecosystems to allow species to migrate. 

As set out in the Nature Restoration Law that we fought for, we want to restore degraded natural 
areas and ecosystems across the EU. Working with farmers, fishers and local communities is key to 
protecting biodiversity and fighting climate change. The EU must fulfil the international commitments 
made at the UN Biodiversity Conference (COP 15) in Montreal and take ambitious action in 
biodiversity protection and restoration. 

Forests as Europe’s green lung 

Forests are threatened by deforestation and the consequences of climate change. They are our 
lungs and life-support system, home to most land-based biodiversity and major carbon sinks. 
Forests also play a crucial role in providing clean air, regulating the water cycle, and preventing soil 
erosion. Forest protection and restoration are key for reaching our climate goals. 

As Greens, we see old-growth forests, closer-to-nature management, and biodiversity-friendly 
afforestation and restoration as key for healthy forests in Europe. We need a common forest fire 
strategy through near-natural mixed forests. We are determined to avoid clear cutting and establish 
protection corridors. Emergency measures are needed to protect forests from poor management, 
pollution, and climate change. 

Caring for our soils with sustainable food and agriculture 

Europe needs a Common Food and Agriculture Policy to support changes in what we eat, how we 
produce food, and where we get it from. Farmers and agricultural workers are undergoing a double 
crisis. On the one hand, climate change and biodiversity loss threaten their activity. On the other 
hand, many in the sector are not receiving fair remuneration for the food they produce. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Every farmer in Europe should be able to make a decent income from their work. We need to 
address structural issues in the food sector, making our food system more resilient and supporting 
local production in line with food sovereignty. We need to make sure farmers are not exposed to 
unfair competition from products not respecting the same standards, including from third countries. 

We need a fundamental shift away from subsidies for industrial agriculture based on pesticides, 
monocultures, and animal suffering and towards massive investment into organic farming and 
agroecological production. The current agricultural model is highly dependent on inputs such as 
fertilizers, animal feed and fossil fuels, including from outside the EU. 

Years of misguided subsidies have concentrated landholdings and driven small and medium-sized 
farmers into the ground. The EU must promote a new agricultural model that reduces emissions, 
protect the environment, and foster social justice. 

This green and social transition for agriculture, supported by retargeted EU funds, is an opportunity 
for secure and sustainable business models that will benefit millions of European farmers. 

The Common Food and Agricultural Policy will condition EU agricultural funding on social and 
environmental criteria to provide quality jobs and increase food security. This means that one third 
of the EU budget will be dedicated to sustainable food systems that improve soil quality, cut 
emissions, and reduce food waste, while addressing the economic situation of farmers and reducing 
the negative impact our agricultural system has on developing countries. The EU needs to 
strengthen the plant-based protein sector and encourage a transition towards more plant-based 
diets, building on policy proposals including the Plant-Based Treaty. 

Healthy food also means pesticide-free food. We must reduce the use of chemical pesticides to 
save ecosystems, keep soil healthy and protect human health. We will fight for a 50% reduction in 
pesticide use by 2030. Glyphosate is not necessary for productive farming, nor for weed control. 
Glyphosate can and must be banned, with economic support for farmers to make this shift. 

GMO-free Europe 

We believe that GMOs are not the solution to the challenges facing the agricultural sector and we 
want consumers to retain the choice of eating food free from GMOs. As Greens, we are committed 
to the precautionary principle and will maintain the existing regulatory regime for all GMOs and new 
genomic techniques. New techniques must not be excluded from the protections already set out in 
EU law for GMOs. 

Farmers must be protected from agroindustry’s use of intellectual property law to enforce economic 
dependency. All products that contain genetically modified products must be traceable and labelled. 
National governments must retain the right to ban the cultivation of genetically modified crops. 

Making animal welfare a priority 

We will make animal welfare a priority at the EU level and fight for EU policymaking to pay greater 
regard to animal welfare, as required by the EU treaties. In reforming agricultural policy, we 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

advocate for stricter rules on animal husbandry conditions, use of antibiotics, and animal 
transportation. Zoonotic spillover and anti-microbial resistance risk another devastating pandemic. 

We want to end animal mega-farms and animal cruelty in industrial farming. While the European 
Commission did nothing with the historic European Citizens’ Initiative on ending the cage age, we 
will take up the citizens’ fight so that cage farming is finally banned. We will continue to fight for 
stricter rules to protect animals during commercial transport, including via a maximum of 8-hour 
transport time with a maximum of 4-hour transport time for certain species and categories of 
vulnerable animals. We also support a ban of the transport of unweaned animals transport and 
exports of live animals to third countries that do not respect EU animal welfare standards. We fully 
support the European Citizens’ Initiative on a fur-free Europe. 

Our Common Food and Agricultural Policy will take the funds currently used to support 
unsustainable industrial animal farming and redirect them to improving housing systems and 
management practices in the interest of animal welfare. 

Our commitment extends to stronger protections for all animals, including animals used in science, 
pets, aquatic animals, and wild animals. We will fight to end cruel practices such as the systematic 
killing of male chicks, force-feeding, fur farming, cruel hunting practices, and bullfighting. 
Additionally, we call for more robust control over the exotic pet trade through the introduction of EU-
wide lists of approved pet species. Finally, we will fight puppy and kitten mills and advocate for 
humane sterilization and control policies for stray dog and cat populations. 

Thriving seas and oceans  

Europe’s marine regions need protection. The chemical and ecological state of our seas is poor in 
many places. Chemical and plastic pollution, underwater noise, raw material extraction, and waste 
threaten marine life, while excess nutrients leave many waters with little or no life. Current 
regulations need to be strengthened and fully enforced to fight marine pollution. 

To safeguard our shared oceans and seas, we will introduce a Seas and Oceans Law. This law will 
ensure coherence among all marine-related policies and lead to clean, thriving healthy and seas 
and oceans in a fair and equitable way by 2030. This law will establish the right to pollution-free and 
ecologically healthy seas and oceans.  

To halt the further degradation of marine ecosystems, support artisanal low-impact fisheries and 
coastal communities, and build climate resilience, Europe needs to end overfishing and phase out 
harmful fishing practices. The Common Fisheries Policy must encourage the transition towards low-
impact fisheries, fair and transparent quota distribution systems, and sustainable seafood 
consumption. This transition must be planned in close cooperation with fishers and coastal 
communities. Marine Protected Areas need to be effectively protected, especially from harmful 
fishing techniques such as bottom trawling. 

The EU imports about 70% of its sea food, so it has a global role and responsibility when it comes 
to sustainable fishing. We will fight for more ambitious rules at the global level. These rules should 
promote low-impact fisheries in third countries, together with local and small-scale fishers, and 
reduce our imports of seafood coming from overfishing. Aquaculture, such as offshore fish farms, is 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

not a long-term replacement for wild-caught seafood given its negative impacts on the environment, 
fisheries, local communities, and animal welfare. The EU must regulate the development of 
aquaculture and aquaculture imports. 

We will fight against deep-sea mining and call for a global moratorium. It is high time to protect deep 
sea marine ecosystems. We will oppose any and all expansion of offshore oil and gas exploration 
and extraction. 

Securing Livelihoods for All  

Our Green and Social Deal protects everyone’s – including and especially the most vulnerable – 
right to life’s essentials: renewable energy and green transport, decent housing and nutritious food, 
and quality education and care. 

Renewable energy for all  

Everyone should have access to sufficient, affordable, and renewable energy as a basic right. 125 
million people in the EU struggle to heat their homes with women and older people 
disproportionately affected. Eliminating energy poverty is an essential priority for the EU.  

We support an Energy Guarantee to provide all households with a sufficient amount of energy at an 
affordable price. Vulnerable groups will benefit from targeted support, including for energy-saving 
investments, and no vulnerable household will be cut off from their energy needs because of their 
inability to pay. 

Consuming one’s own energy, sharing it with neighbours, and joining an energy community must 
become an opportunity that all can benefit from. We will also ensure that storage technologies such 
as batteries and vehicle to grid are sufficiently deployed and accessible to all. 

Affordable housing for all  

Housing is a right, not a commodity. Decent, comfortable housing that is warm in winter and cool in 
summer should be accessible for all. On any given night, there are 900,000 homeless people in the 
EU, while millions struggle with rising rents in big cities and energy poverty linked to poor-quality 
housing – all symptoms of chronic underinvestment in quality, well-insulated affordable and social 
housing.  

We must encourage and increase public and private investment in affordable housing, including 
social housing. We support the introduction of rent control in cities and regions where rents have 
exploded to become out of reach. As achieved by several Green cities across the EU, we advocate 
limits on short-term tourist rentals to keep rents down. We will keep fighting for the right of young 
people to live in full independence. 

We must take a European approach towards public housing policy, defining housing as a basic right 
and protecting those who rent properties from exploitation. EU funding for public housing must 
continue after the current Resilient and Recovery Fund expires. We will fight for an "Affordable 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Housing EU" plan, also funded by fresh money raised at EU level, to support investment across 
Europe. 

Warm in winter, cool in summer 

We need an EU programme to renovate the homes of people facing the highest energy bills on low 
incomes. A large-scale social energy renovation programme can make sure everyone lives in a 
healthy and fossil-free home by 2040. 75% of buildings are energy inefficient in Europe, responsible 
for 36% of carbon emissions – a huge opportunity for improvement through renovation and 
retrofitting. 

Support needs to be available for all, with the bulk of financing targeting the most vulnerable, and 
renovation must be cost-neutral for tenants. EU, member state and private investment in rapid 
renovation will provide nicer, greener places to live and create quality jobs. Our fiscal proposals will 
incentivize public investment in green housing at the level of member states as well as unlock 
private money to renovate Europe’s housing stock. 

Healthy food for all 

A shift to a sustainable, climate-friendly food system is imperative for people in Europe to enjoy 
affordable, nutritious food for which producers are properly remunerated. Many key risk factors of 
non-communicable diseases like cancer are dietary. Our vision is that of connecting consumers and 
producers, empowering people to make informed choices, and ensuring farmers get a fair price. 

We will establish the right to food as a principle in EU legislation, leading to dedicated social 
security mechanisms at national level that guarantee access to healthy food while supporting local 
supply chains. 

We will support small and ecological farming with massive investment. Millions of Europeans have 
struggled with soaring food prices in recent years. No one should go without healthy and 
sustainably produced food because it is too expensive. 

It is time to stop the speculation on food driving hunger globally. Our financial transactions and 
windfall tax proposals will curb the speculation driving up food prices for households. 

Water is a human right 

Access to clean water should be guaranteed as a basic right. Water scarcity is already costing 
billions each year, with farmers and low-income households among the worst affected and the 
Mediterranean region particularly vulnerable. 

Urgent action is needed to protect the right to clean and adequate water for all. We want to prohibit 
the privatization of water resources. Water should be regarded as a natural common and managed 
by public entities. We use existing EU legislation to protect vulnerable reserves and prioritize 
drinking water over other uses. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Mobility justice for all 

We want people to be able to get around easily and cheaply on sustainable public transport. 
Mobility is crucial to everyone, every day. It connects people, communities, and businesses, while 
traveling to see friends and family or for leisure should be one of life’s pleasures. 

Today, transport systems are stacked in favour of the wealthy and against people and the planet. 
Working-class neighbourhoods suffer most from air and noise pollution and poorly connected rural 
and suburban communities often have no choice other than the car. High-emission transport is 
perversely subsidized, and private jets are pushing emissions ever higher.  

We will introduce a European Climate Ticket framework, so that every part of Europe offers an 
affordable public transport pass easily used across different modes of public transport. Until then, 
national flat-rate tickets for local public transport in member states should be mutually recognized. 
Young people, single-parent families, people in poverty, people living with disabilities, and the 
elderly should benefit from reduced fares. 

Europe must invest in better public transport, safe and sustainable cycling networks, and people-
centric urban planning, for cities as well as rural communities. As Europe phases out internal 
combustion engines, electric cars will be part of reducing transport emissions, but a real response 
makes much more room for public transport. To make electric cars affordable and create a second-
hand market, the EU should mandate their uptake in corporate fleets. 

Connecting Europe with an Infrastructure Union 

We need to massively increase investment in and coordination of rail transport to literally connect 
Europe as part of our Infrastructure Union. Rail infrastructure in many European regions is in a state 
of disrepair and there is no high-speed rail coverage whatsoever in much of Central and Eastern 
Europe. The EU must therefore prioritize investment in the modernization and convergence of 
under-served regions. 

To promote sustainable long-distance travel, we will invest in night train infrastructure and create a 
European Ticketing Platform to make booking cross-border journeys on sustainable transport 
straightforward. Rural areas and poorly connected regions will be prioritized in transport 
investments, including car-sharing initiatives, ferries and rail freight.  

We will make sure that fairer prices show the real cost of polluting transport, taxing air travel and 
fuel properly where efficient climate-friendly alternatives cannot be put in place. We will reduce 
demand for flights, introducing a frequent flyer levy, with exceptions for island regions, and banning 
short-haul where alternatives are available. We will fight to introduce a ban on private jets. We 
defend a just transition for all transport workers and will protect workers and passengers through 
road safety measures and an EU-wide speed limit. 

Quality education for all 

Accessible quality public education, training and lifelong learning should be available to everyone in 
Europe, regardless of where they live or their wealth. Education can equip our societies so they can 

14 

 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

overcome inequality, make progress on the green transition, and stay at the forefront of science and 
culture. Jobs in new green industries can only be filled if we have the people trained to do them. 

We have been ardent supporters of Erasmus+ since its inception and will introduce an Erasmus 
Equality principle to make sure that learners who could not otherwise afford Erasmus receive 
enough money to fully fund their time abroad. Erasmus+ must be equally accessible for all, 
regardless of one’s country or economic background.  

Our Green and Social Deal will introduce a shared green education and training project that helps 
connect schools, universities, and training centres to connect learning institutions across Europe. 
Citizenship education about the EU, including anti-extremism, anti-hate and anti-racism education, 
should be part of curricula and non-formal education learning recognized at the EU level. Education 
investments are a critical part of our proposals to finance the transition, and need to give everybody 
the chance to learn and provide the skills we need for the future. 

Access to healthcare for all 

Health is a public good to which everyone has a right. The pandemic was tragic evidence that 
underinvestment, privatization, and the neglect of preventative approaches put patients and health 
workers at risk, physically and mentally. 

A European Health Union should make sure member states provide everyone in Europe with 
universal health coverage. We will push to eliminate health inequities and guarantee access to 
affordable medicines and treatment, including for cancer and rare diseases, in ways that are 
inclusive to all parts of society, especially the most vulnerable and racialized communities. No one 
in Europe should feel forced to move to a different country because of unmet healthcare needs. 
European legislation on universal health coverage will require all member states to provide this 
essential social right. 

We still see the consequences of the pandemic all over Europe. Many people still show symptoms 
of long Covid. We must promote research into the long-term consequences of Covid-19 infection. 
The European Union should create an EU Health Force for cooperation on health emergencies and 
disaster response. All policies should be looked at from a health perspective. 

A green society is a caring society 

Society runs on care. It is our overlooked, undervalued, and often unpaid foundation. As Greens, we 
want to build a caring society and understand care as an overarching priority and concept. As 
European societies get older, the importance of care will grow, especially in those European 
countries that have experienced recent major emigration. 

Our Green and Social Deal is also a Care Deal. We will push to improve working conditions for care 
workers, while protecting everyone’s right to proper care. We will invest in comprehensive, life-long 
approaches, such as universal access to early childhood education and care and deinstitutionalized 
care for disabled people and the elderly. Early childhood education and care must be counted as 
social investment in the EU fiscal framework. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Mental health is political  

Our Universal Health Coverage will go beyond physical health and make sure that public healthcare 
systems include mental health care with no additional costs for individuals. Mental and physical 
health must have parity of esteem. To tackle the mental health crisis, we recognize the need for 
inclusive and comprehensive preventative and healing strategies that include culture and sport as 
well as social and creative activities. 

Time to rethink Europe’s drug policy  

Drug policy must be based on evidence, not prejudice. We advocate for an EU approach based on 
harm reduction, health, and support for people who suffer from drug addiction and that minimizes 
the negative social impacts of drug use. We work towards decriminalizing cannabis for adult use 
with the goal of legalization and regulation whilst protecting minors. 

Fair play in sport 

Sport connects people in Europe, promotes health, and fosters social cohesion. European funding 
should be more easily accessible and better motivate the world of sports to comply with climate 
targets. An independent European Anti-Corruption Agency should ensure transparency and integrity 
in sport worldwide. Establishing clear standards will enable major international sporting events in 
Europe that comply with climate targets and respect human rights. 

Building a Europe of Social Rights 

Our Green and Social Deal will put people and their wellbeing at the centre of Europe’s green 
transformation and economy. The social welfare state was one of Europe’s biggest successes. 
Rebuilding that welfare state for the 21st century is the only way to protect and extend social rights 
for everyone in Europe. A Europe of Social Rights must empower and protect workers and 
communities in transition and be inclusive to all. It must protect the people who face multiple and 
intersectional forms of discrimination in their daily lives. 

Decent jobs for all 

European workers deserve a fair wage, especially after years of price rises. We fight to end in-work 
poverty. In the last EU mandate, we won an EU-wide living minimum wage framework that sets 
minimum wages at a decent level indexed to the cost of living. We won measures on pay 
transparency that will help end the huge pay discrepancies that exist within companies and 
institutions. 

We are fighting for legislation that will recognize platform workers as workers, with all the rights to 
minimum wages, collective bargaining, and employment conditions and protection that workers are 
legally entitled to. 

The jobs in the key sectors for the future from construction and care to energy and education must 
be well paid. We support the role of trade unions in ensuring that workers get their fair share of 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

profits. Our tax proposals will reduce the tax burden on workers and support access to energy, food, 
and housing for the poorest by increasing taxes on polluters and the ultra-rich. 

Fighting poverty comprehensively 

Everyone has the right to a decent income. A strong social safety net should protect people in 
employment transitions and those who cannot work. We call for an EU framework directive on 
minimum income to establish an adequate level of support (60% of the median income) in each EU 
country for people between jobs or who cannot work and guarantee its coverage and take-up. This 
should not undermine national collective bargaining models or social security systems.  

The short-term SURE unemployment insurance programme should be made permanent to protect 
the livelihoods of workers affected by transition. We continue to demand an integrated anti-poverty 
strategy for the EU to end homelessness by 2030 and at the very least halve child poverty by 2030 
and eliminate child poverty by 2040. 

Universal basic income should be researched and studied. We therefore advocate for national basic 
income pilots. 

Nothing about workers without workers 

Our Green and Social Deal protects workers and their rights. We want to build a Union where 
people are properly treated and paid for their work, especially the essential workers who keep 
society running and everyone building the infrastructure necessary for a green tomorrow. 

There should be nothing about workers without workers. We will fight for the rights of trade unions 
to organize, collective bargaining, and strike. Workers affected by the twin green and digital 
transitions should have guaranteed rights to information, involvement through collective bargaining 
and social dialogue, and training. Unionizing for new or non-standard forms of work should be 
supported to guarantee the rights of all workers. These rights and standards should be protected by 
a Just Transition Law. A Lifelong Learning Directive should protect the right to paid training leave. 

Fair labour mobility for all  

Europe must enable and protect fair mobility of workers across borders, so no one falls through the 
cracks of nationally fragmented social systems. To avoid social dumping, social rights and access to 
the labour market must be ensured. Administrative tasks should be possible in different languages, 
social services should be open to mobile workers, and social coordination on EU level should be 
fostered. The recognition of professional qualifications should be made easier. 

Many EU countries are suffering from the consequences of massive emigration. The economic and 
social convergence of EU countries must be a priority for EU policymaking and investments to 
improve the quality of life and opportunity for people across Europe. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

New rights for the future of work 

Work should take place on decent terms and in safe conditions. We will dismantle the current 
system that exploits interns and trainees. We will end the practice of unpaid internships so that 
young people are guaranteed proper pay and safe working conditions. Mobile and migrant work 
should be properly regulated with all such workers receiving decent and affordable accommodation. 

Occupational health and safety measures must be updated for the reality of climate change and 
enforced, such as rules on heatwaves and working in extreme temperatures. Too much work 
causes stress and ill health. We will introduce measures that reduce working time and improve 
work-life balance, including an EU Right to Disconnect, Right to Remote Work, and flexibility in 
working hours. We support the efforts across the EU to introduce a four-day working week. We will 
not let workers be monitored by artificial intelligence-based surveillance tools. 

Equal pay for equal work 

We will fight for equal pay for equal work and equal opportunities for all at work. Fully eliminating the 
gender pay gap through binding measures for all employers is long overdue. The gender pay gap 
depends on factors such as ethnicity, disability, access to education, and age. Different groups of 
women experience very different gaps in pay. 

Universal and equal access to childcare and long-term care facilities and the revision of the Work-
Life Balance Directive and the Maternity Leave Directive can move Europe towards fully paid 
parental leave of equal and sufficient duration. 

Equal opportunities from the start 

As the start of life is decisive, we demand adequate funding for the European Child Guarantee to 
make sure that all children have access to care, childhood education, healthy nutrition, adequate 
housing and healthcare. At the same time, we want to support parents’ participation in the labour 
market. All children have the right to participate in play, recreation, sport and culture. 

All children in the EU should have guaranteed access to high-quality care and education – no 
matter their passport. We want to work with member states to ensure that the direly needed 
investment in education and care infrastructure is finally taken up. 

An Economy that Works for All 

The European Union is the key level for climate and environmental policy where we make those 
crucial, shared decisions that steer European societies on a greener path. 

Thanks to the mobilization of the climate movement, we Greens managed to push for a European 
Green Deal in 2019 and put the climate crisis at the top of the agenda. But progress is too little and 
too slow. The quicker Europe moves forward with its green transition, the sooner our investments 
and efforts will pay off. The climate will not wait for other crises to pass. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Our Green and Social Deal envisions a major investment plan to build a prosperous and dynamic 
society based on climate neutrality, green industries and technologies, and sustainable 
digitalization. 

Investing in a green and better future 

Europe’s economic and fiscal policies need to focus on improving people’s wellbeing and quality of 
life and maintaining a stable climate and a healthy environment. In a break with the austerity of the 
past, Europe must enable and encourage investment to fix the problems of the present and future. 

We will revise the arbitrary limits of the Maastricht Criteria and the Stability and Growth Pact. They 
have left Europe exposed to crises and led to cuts in public services in several countries and limited 
public investments, undermining social cohesion. 

Instead, we will introduce a new wellbeing-based macroeconomic governance that prioritizes quality 
investment in public goods and the green transition over the outdated growth-at-any-cost paradigm 
to avoid further crises and their social consequences. 

We call for the introduction of a Green Golden Rule and a reformed European Semester to create 
space for future-oriented green and social investment. We will revise the rules regarding state aid 
and public investment to encourage green investments without undermining fair competition on 
internal market. 

The mandate of the European Central Bank should be revised to include full employment 
alongside price stability. As fossil fuels are vulnerable to price hikes and drive inflation, we also 
want the European Central Bank to make use of all tools at its disposal to encourage green 
investment, including differentiated interest rates. 

Greening industry for our future competitiveness 

The green transition is the challenge of our generation, and it will not be achieved without active 
industrial policy. Greening industries through investment in Europe is a huge opportunity in terms of 
both competitiveness and climate neutrality. 

We will push for a Green and Social Transition Fund equivalent to at the very least 1% of EU GDP 
per year, mainly financed by joint borrowing at the EU level. 

The backbone of our Infrastructure Union, it will fund green infrastructure projects such as public 
transport and rail freight, renewables, and energy grid connections. It will fund emerging green 
industries and the deep renovation of housing stock. The fund will also support training programmes 
essential to the creation of decent jobs in new green sectors and improving essential social 
infrastructure necessary for a just transition. 

A key lever to fight deindustrialisation across the EU, this fund will support member states with 
fewer economic resources and sectors affected by the transition. EU-level investment is needed to 
protect the single market and win political backing for the green transition in all EU countries. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

EU industrial policy must be designed with the participation of citizens, trade unions and businesses 
and not become a way to socialize the costs while privatizing the profits. We will make sure that the 
public purse benefits from the proceeds of investments in industries, for example through equity 
stakes. Social conditionalities must ensure the creation of quality jobs. Industrial policy should not 
be introduced at the expense of emissions reductions and regulation. European support for 
research and development can also contribute towards scientific and technological development, as 
well as other societal goals, and should be increased. 

Financing the Green and Social Deal  

The money to finance this much-needed investment is there. We are convinced that the EU can 
help channel it towards green and social investment. A mix of fiscal policy, public investment, and 
private initiative will drive this change. A fairer economic system requires greater redistribution, the 
better use of public funds, and all actors in society playing their part.  

Creating a fair tax system 

Europe needs a just tax system that takes the burden off workers and small businesses and makes 
polluters, multinationals, and the ultra-rich pay their fair share. 

We will establish a minimum level for capital gains tax in the EU to rebalance the tax burden away 
from employees. We will close the loopholes in the OECD corporate minimum tax agreement and 
push EU member states to implement the agreement at a higher level. Loopholes that leave room 
for tax avoidance and evasion inside and outside the EU as well as fraud and money laundering will 
be closed. We will fight against tax havens, be them in the EU or anywhere else in the world. 

The European Union requires greater budgetary resources to face our common challenges. Europe 
must extend the carbon border tax to new polluting sectors, apply the polluter pays principle across 
all sectors, and abolish free quotas ahead of the current 2034 date. We will increase the scope of 
existing taxes on plastics. 

We will push to massively increase the size of the EU Social Climate Fund to ensure a just transition 
for low-income households.  

We call for an EU-wide wealth tax to fight inequality and finance the green transition. In addition, we 
will push for a European financial transactions tax to generate revenue while curbing speculation. 
We will make the EU windfall tax on energy companies permanent to prevent profiteering in future 
energy crises and apply it to commodity traders and banks too. 

Greening finance for real 

We will regulate financial services to promote long-term investment in a green and social future over 
short-term speculation. We will fight to revise the Green Taxonomy to make sure that gas and 
nuclear are not greenwashed as “sustainable”. Fossil gas and nuclear energy cannot be labelled as 
clean. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Investments in new coal, oil and gas extraction, coal-fired energy projects, and the companies that 
develop them must be disincentivized. The continued development of high-emission activities 
jeopardizes the EU’s climate and environmental commitments and increases financial risks. 

We will oblige financial actors to adopt robust climate transition plans to support their economic 
transition and enable a gradual transformation. Their content and implementation must be 
regulated, with sectoral policies for the highest-emitting activities and methods for setting 
decarbonization targets. We will fight to include all banking sector activities in the Corporate 
Sustainability Due Diligence Directive, so the banking sector is accountable for the human rights, 
environmental and climate impact of its investments. 

Stable and inclusive banking for Europe 

Households should no longer end up lining the pockets of financial players speculating on food, 
energy and housing or bear the fallout of financial crashes. The EU needs to complete its much 
overdue banking union and introduce a common deposit insurance system.  

The European Central Bank should offer a public digital euro to offer an alternative to private 
payment systems, crypto-currency markets should be properly regulated, including their 
environmental impacts, and the right of people to access and use cash should be protected as a 
matter of inclusion. 

Closing the loop with a circular economy  

Produce, consume, and throw away – the economy of our society leads to resource use beyond the 
limits of our planet. If we do nothing to change this, by 2050, we will need three Earths to satisfy our 
need for raw materials. This linear model fuels the climate crisis, environmental destruction, and 
human rights violations in resource extraction. It leaves our supply chains vulnerable to crises and 
our economies and businesses dependent on imports. 

Waste must become a design flaw. We want to build a fully renewable, fully circular, and non-toxic 
economy by 2040 with clear and binding targets and transition pathways to reduce consumption 
and resource use by 2030. 

As the green transition requires growing amounts of metals, we must adopt a sufficiency approach 
and prioritize the development of processing and recycling capacities for strategic materials. 

If extraction in the EU proves to be necessary to ensure secure and sustainable supply chains, we 
must impose the highest environmental and social standards. There should be no exemptions from 
EU legislation or human and environmental rights conditions, strict and irreversible “no-mining” 
areas, and continuous effort to improve mining techniques and working conditions (including health 
and safety coverage) and ban of the most harmful ones. Affected communities – particularly 
Europe’s last indigenous community, the Sami people – must receive early information, 
participation, consent, and fair compensation. 

21 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Zero waste is the business model of the future 

Our vision is a fully circular economy where we reuse, upcycle, share, and recycle our products to 
keep the materials in a closed loop. This approach protects resources and the climate and saves 
money for consumers as products last longer. Environmental and consumer protection go hand in 
hand. As Greens, we will push for the fast implementation of the mandatory sustainability 
requirements for our products and for EU action to ensure industry compliance.  

We will fight the premature obsolescence, including from software and the lack of repairability, that 
is devastating the planet as well as household budgets. We will make sure that an effective and 
affordable right to repair, including an EU-wide repair score and an open repair market for 
independent repairers and consumers, is properly introduced. We will support the creation of an 
internal market for second-hand goods and refurbishment. We want new technical standards, such 
as the common charger, that incentivize product durability and that pave the way a zero-waste 
society with no waste exports to third countries. 

Building a social and collaborative economy  

Our vision of the economy is dynamic and circular where the small and medium-sized businesses 
(SMEs) that form the backbone of Europe’s economy thrive alongside new models of community, 
social and collaborative economies. 

SMEs should operate on a level playing field with large companies. We strive to avoid bureaucracy 
and regulation that is more complex, rigid or otherwise burdensome than is necessary to protect the 
public good. We promote digital tools wherever they can make compliance easier. 

The power of sustainable public procurement should be unlocked to foster high ecological and 
social standards and promote collective bargaining. European regulation should enable alternative 
economic models such as cooperatives, crowdfunding, social entrepreneurship, and the commons. 
This fertile ground for local initiatives should be strengthened, with priority for sectors that face 
strong international competition such as textiles. 

Sustainable digitization for the people and the planet  

Digital technologies are an ever-more important part of our lives; they should protect the rights of 
individuals and serve the common good before the interests of private corporations. Caught 
between US surveillance capitalism and China-style state control, Europe needs a rights-based, 
decentralized approach to digitalization to reap its benefits. 

We will introduce a European Data Space that opens anonymized social data uses that serve the 
common good, including the fight for climate justice and medical research. Interoperability is key to 
successful digital policy. The European Interoperability Framework is a good starting point, but it 
does not yet create a level-playing field. We will push to open standardization to developers, civil 
society and SMEs. Their involvement must be compensated so that everyone can equally 
participate in this process. 

22 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

If truly open and with rights protected by legislation, digitalization will be an opportunity for people in 
Europe. Recent EU legislation will provide greater choice and transparency online, protecting 
against violations of rights and freedoms. However, the EU needs to introduce a Digital Fairness Act 
to protect people from intrusive online advertising practices. 

We will legislate to increase the reuse and recycling of digital devices and components within the 
EU and cut the energy consumption linked to data processing and cryptocurrency to massively 
reduce the internet’s material footprint. 

Continuing a success story: protecting European consumers 

Strong consumer protections such as roaming rights and passengers’ rights and product safety 
measures are major successes of the single market. But with the economy changing fast, the EU’s 
high standards need an urgent update to protect people, especially online. 

Consumers should enjoy the same rights online and offline. With an increasing share of e-
commerce involving potentially unsafe purchases directly from third-party sellers, we call for greater 
responsibility on online marketplaces and extended and coordinated approval and testing 
procedures by customs and market surveillance authorities. 

As Greens, we will make sure that people receive clear and comprehensive information about the 
environmental impact of products and services sold in the EU, including information on expected 
product lifespan and its environmental footprint. In the single market, there must be no first- or 
second-class consumers. Products marketed in the same way in different European countries must 
be of the same quality and composition. Consumer rights should be upheld fully everywhere in the 
EU. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

CHAPTER II: The Courage to Stand Up Against the Far Right – For a Europe of Democracy, 
Feminism and Human Rights 

Charlie just wants to be Charlie. Nothing more. Why is their gender so difficult for the world around 
them to accept? 

Zara knows what she wants: end the horrible pain of endometriosis. Find a drug that could help so 
many people. But sometimes it seems like people can’t see any further than her skin colour, her last 
name, or her choice of clothing.  

Daniel wants to scream it out to the world. He is in love with a man. He wants to go out at night, 
walk the streets of Sofia with his partner, and bring his partner to the company Christmas party.  

Last year, Mirna voted to for an alternative to corruption, intimidation and manipulation in her home 
country, but its democracy and the rule of law continue to deteriorate. Instead of going to work, 
Mirna now demonstrates every day, together with thousands of fellow citizens, to bring about 
change. 

Prejudice, discrimination, and threats to fair democratic processes continue to hold European 
societies back. But we can change this. It must be changed.  

A European Union of democracy, freedom and fundamental rights is ours to build. 

Racism never went away. For example, anti-Muslim racism, antisemitism and antigypsyism are all 
on the rise. Discrimination and exclusion remain far too common for people living with disabilities, 
people living in poverty and other vulnerable groups.  

At Europe’s borders, people are dying. Mediterranean migration routes are the deadliest in the 
world. People seeking safety and protection increasingly face detention, brutal and illegal 
pushbacks, and violence at the hands of smugglers and border authorities. The far-right exploits 
and deepens their suffering, dragging mainstream parties to the right and normalizing migration 
policies that are both dysfunctional and unsustainable. 

Far-right parties are gaining ground with their tried and trusted tactics of spinning half-truths and 
scapegoating minorities. This conservative backlash is working strategically to roll back our rights 
and freedoms. Once firm believers in the European project, even mainstream conservatives are 
opening the door for anti-democratic forces who threaten the rule of law. 

We have the courage to stand up to the far right to protect everyone’s rights and freedoms.  

Greens will safeguard democracy and the rule of law and demand a different European Union. We 
are convinced that the European Union needs to be more united to tackle our shared problems. 
We call for a federal European Union with increased powers, deep democracy, and real 
transparency and accountability. 

We will fight racism and exclusion in all its forms. We will make sure that nobody can make 
decisions about your body. We demand a fair asylum system that defends human rights and 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

dignity. We work towards a migration policy that recognizes the immense contribution that migrants 
make to our societies. We believe that policies work best when shaped by the people concerned. 
We are certain that democracy cannot flourish without vibrant civic space and empowered civil 
society actors. We stand for judicial independence and freedom of the press. 

The European Union was founded to protect peace and democracy and uphold freedom, rights, 
and justice.  

We will make that founding promise a reality for all.  

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

The Necessary Next Step: A United Europe Ready for Enlargement 

To face the great challenges of our century, from the green transition to fighting growing inequalities 
and protecting democracy, the European Union needs to reform its treaties and move forward 
towards a federal Europe able to act and welcome new members. 

At the Conference on the Future of Europe, European citizens gave a clear message that they 
support new treaties giving the EU greater competences. They called for deepened European 
democracy, with more power for the European Parliament, an end to national vetoes, a larger EU 
budget, and stronger EU competences on key issues such as health, tax, and social protection. As 
Greens, we stand behind their proposals. 

Extending democracy at the heart of Europe 

We stand for a federal Europe, for a fully ﬂedged supranational democracy able to deliver. 

The need for unanimity between European member states on matters from tax and foreign policy to 
anti-discrimination and Article 7 procedures to protect democracy prevents the EU from taking 
decisions for the common good. 

The European Parliament must have the right to propose legislation and equal budgetary power. 
The Council of the European Union should act as a second chamber for EU law-making, not the 
venue for late-night haggling over inter-governmental deals. The President of the European 
Commission should be proposed by the European Parliament. 

The current EU budget is patently insufficient to address the challenges Europe faces. Supported by 
its own resources, such as EU-level fossil and wealth taxes, the EU budget should be raised 
significantly with an expanded role of the European Parliament and civil society in monitoring EU 
spending. EU competences should be expanded to ensure the EU can deliver. This truly 
transnational democracy must also ensure a residence-based European citizenship. 

For Europe to take this much needed step, a democratic mandate from citizens is vital. That is why 
an EU-wide inclusive constituent process should lead to these treaty changes.  

Treaty changes should then be ratified through a Europe-wide referendum according to a double 
majority system of votes cast: Europe-wide and in a majority of member states. 

We will set up enhanced cooperation if a handful of member states try to hold progress back. 
Enhanced cooperation will allow an ambitious ecological and social transition now, without waiting 
for treaty change. 

Bringing Europe to life with citizens’ participation  

Public participation and engagement strengthen the European Union. The EU institutions should 
take steps to make voting in EU elections more accessible, including for people with disabilities. To 
increase democratic participation, we want online voting to be piloted for the 2029 EU election, at 
least for mobile European citizens. Transnational lists for the European Parliament should be 

26 

 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

introduced alongside national lists, creating an additional single EU-wide constituency to which 
citizens elect a large number of MEPs. 

As democracy is about more than elections, the Greens will push for the introduction of citizens’ 
panels to make EU policy choices more inclusive. The framework for petitions and specifically the 
European Citizens Initiative must be strengthened to open more channels for citizens to influence 
EU policy and oblige the European institutions to respond with legislative proposals. A framework 
for EU-wide referenda should be introduced. 

Stronger together: enlarging the Union 

Many people in the European neighbourhood long to become EU citizens, first and foremost with 
Ukraine fighting for our values and European security. Our Union is founded on the values of 
respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human 
rights. It holds the promise of peace, justice, shared values and prosperity and each member, old 
and new, is responsible for upholding these principles and objectives.  

A new push for enlargement is long overdue. The EU has always been a project with geopolitical 
implications. As the EU is built on shared rules and values, it helps make borders less important. 
The EU’s enlargement is therefore the best prospect for lasting peace and security in Europe.  

All European countries who strive to be part of or re-join the EU and who share our values must be 
welcomed on the path to EU membership and given all the support they require to fulfil the criteria. 

Keeping our promises: a pathway to joining the European Union  

The European Union must keep its promises to candidate countries: Albania, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, Ukraine and Georgia. We support 
Kosovo’s efforts to become a candidate for EU membership. We will support these countries on 
their paths to meet the Copenhagen Criteria, those concerning democracy and the rule of law must 
be dealt with as a priority. 

Accessing the single market and EU budget requires meeting these criteria and progress in the 
process must be based on merit. As Greens, we believe that the EU must work more closely with 
civil society in the accession process. We will work towards overcoming unanimity in the Council 
that is currently hindering accession. 

The future of Ukraine lies in the European Union. We will support Ukrainian authorities in 
introducing the reforms required for EU membership. EU assistance to Ukraine should, insofar as 
possible, enable a climate-resilient reconstruction and recovery, built on renewable energy, modern 
infrastructure, and a sustainable and inclusive economy. 

Welcoming new members must serve as a vital push for internal reforms to make it easier for the 
EU to make decisions efficiently and effectively. Each candidate country should be able to follow its 
own path into the EU independently of the progress of other candidate countries. 

27 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Taking rapid action for democracy and the rule of law 

One of the biggest blows to European progress in recent years has been the development of 
authoritarian tendencies in the heart of Europe. Citizens of the affected countries are EU citizens, 
and the EU must defend their rights against government power grabs. We want rapid action to put 
an end to EU law’s violations by member states through infringement procedures. This needs a 
clear timeframe, including for the Article 7 procedure. 

We will introduce a Fundamental Values Annual Review to monitor, enforce and sanction the 
infringement of fundamental values across the EU. 

We must ensure that EU funds strengthen prosperity, democracy and the rule of law and do not 
disappear into the pockets of autocrats and their friends. We have made important progress in 
equipping the EU with better tools to do so, but they need to be fully implemented. 

Access to justice must become a reality for all people in the European Union. It is essential that 
vulnerable groups, such as people on low incomes and from marginalized communities, can access 
their right to seek responses and remedies for injustice. 

Fighting corruption! Politics need to be transparent and accountable 

Citizens’ trust in democracy rests on political integrity. Transparency and accountability are vital for 
democratic scrutiny and public oversight. When trust in politicians and democratic institutions is 
under serious threat, we must act. 

The Qatargate scandal showed that the EU institutions are not equipped to prevent corruption and 
massive misconduct. Rather than another advisory body, the EU institutions need an independent 
Ethics Authority with the power and resources to investigate and sanction unethical conduct and 
abuse of office. We need comprehensive legislation on lobbying activities at EU level, including a 
mandatory EU transparency register.  

The EU institutions must become more transparent, including through the pro-active publication of 
all documents on ongoing legislation. These should also include member state positions as it 
remains virtually impossible for citizens to understand how decisions are made in the Council.  

Members and senior staff of EU institutions must declare their assets transparently, as required in 
many member states, and must not be allowed to have paid side-activities for lobbying 
organisations. 

Corruption and misuse of the EU budget undermines the entire European project. We support the 
bodies responsible for protecting the EU’s financial interest, OLAF and the European Public 
Prosecutors Office, and call for greater resources for anti-corruption efforts. 

A Union of Rights and Freedoms: For a Truly Feminist and Anti-Racist Future  

As Greens, we want to build a world where we all live free from violence, racism, sexism, 
queerphobia and coercion. We fight for a world where we get to decide over our bodies, where we 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

can love who we want to love, and where racial justice becomes a reality at last. This world is 
possible, and we will not stop fighting for it. The harder the attacks, the more convinced, 
compassionate, and determined we will be.  

Equal rights for all 

We fight for equal rights for all. This is why we want the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be directly 
applicable to European citizens and fundamental rights to be direct EU competences. 

We call for an overall assessment of the EU Anti-Discrimination framework, acknowledging the need 
for an intersectional and comprehensive approach. To effectively counter discrimination against 
racialized communities and ensure equal rights and treatment for all, the Horizontal Anti-
discrimination Directive needs a major update. It has been 15 years since it was first introduced. 

Smash patriarchy! 

Women are not all the same and understanding their diversity is key to fighting inequality and 
discrimination.  

A feminist Europe must guarantee policies that ensure financial independence for women, notably 
by abolishing tax regimes that discriminate against women and ending the gender pay gap via 
binding measures for companies and public authorities. 

We demand universal and equal access to childcare. We call for the revision of the Work Life 
Balance Directive and the Maternity Leave Directive to advance towards fully paid maternity and 
paternity leaves of equal length.  

Gender mainstreaming must make sure that European money benefits men and women equally. 
We defend a binding parity mechanism for the lists in the European elections and gender balance in 
EU decision-making, including for the top jobs. The EU Commission and the Council need specific 
portfolios for women’s rights and gender equality. 

Our body, our rights! 

We fight to expand reproductive freedom. Sexual and reproductive health and rights, including the 
right to safe abortion, are fundamental rights. They belong in the EU treaties – as core principles 
and competences of the EU and in the directly applicable Charter of Fundamental Rights. Safe and 
legal abortion must be available in all EU member states. Abortion care is an essential health 
service. 

We stand up against the devastating regression on reproductive rights all over the world. No one 
should be criminalized for seeking or accessing abortion services. Women must have access to 
medical abortions. As Greens, we advocate the provision of free, high-quality contraceptives for all. 
Young people have the right to comprehensive sexuality education. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

End gender-based violence 

All women and girls across Europe, including those marginalized on the grounds of race, gender, 
gender identity, age, sexual characteristics, sexual orientation, disability, class or migration status 
have the right to live a life free from violence. Gender-based violence is a brutal human rights 
violation and an expression of unequal power relations in our societies.  

We continue our unswerving fight for comprehensive EU legislation that prevents, responds to, and 
ends gender-based violence online and offline across the EU and addresses it from an 
intersectional and structural perspective. Greens emphasize the role of communities in harm 
prevention and strengthening victims’ rights with specialized support, access to justice, and 
protection for victims with special attention to marginalized communities. All EU member states 
must ratify the Istanbul Convention. The EU should add gender-based violence to the list of EU 
crimes. 

Pride, respect and equality for LGBTQIA+  

A renewed LGBTQIA+ Equality Strategy should ensure that trans, intersex, and non-binary people 
are also protected under the EU legal framework, closing legislative gaps in the areas of non-
discrimination and hate crime. We want to end intersex genital mutilation. We push for legal gender 
recognition based on self-determination and access to trans-specific healthcare. The European 
Union should act politically for an EU-wide ban on so-called “conversion therapy” and forced 
sterilization of transgender people. Rainbow families and their rights must be protected in all of the 
EU, including the full application of the freedom of movement with no loss of rights. 

Fight racism and exclusion 

Racism in Europe is not just a problem of individual attitudes, it is a structural and systemic 
challenge that must be addressed as such. Racial justice should be mainstreamed in all EU 
policies, based on meaningful participation of all ethnic and racialized communities to ensure their 
lived experiences are considered.  

Antisemitism and anti-Muslim racism are on the rise. The EU must be safe for everybody to live. We 
will protect Jewish and Muslim communities and demand an end to all forms of discrimination.  

We will ensure that the EU Action Plan Against Racism is implemented, and work towards its 
renewal for 2025 with appropriate funding and a civil society advisory body. National Action Plans 
must be mandatory for all member states. 

It is a democratic problem that 96% of Members of the European Parliament are white. As Greens, 
we work towards having candidates from racialized communities on electable spots. We actively 
encourage racialized and ethnic-minoritized Greens to run for the European Parliament. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Young voices matter: more rights, more representation  

We fight for votes from 16 for all elections in Europe and the right to stand as a candidate from 18, 
starting with the European elections. As European Greens, we work towards having young 
candidates in electable spots on party lists.  

EU legislation must work for young people. The European Union needs to support the adoption of 
an International Convention on the Rights of Young People. Consultation methods such as annual 
dialogues with youth representative organizations and youth citizens’ agora should be 
institutionalized and legislative impact assessments should systematically include young people. EU 
funds must properly finance youth organizations. 

No to ageism 

Age must not be a barrier to a full and active life, but too often older people are held back by aged-
based discrimination and exclusion. Older people are among the social groups most at risk of 
poverty as well as digital exclusion. As Greens, we will take a stand against ageism in European 
policies. Very old people make up the fastest growing demographic in Europe and we need to be 
resilient. We support measures that promote the inclusion of older people and their participation in 
policy matters, such joining the WHO’s Global Network of Age-friendly Cities and Communities. 

We demand fair pensions for all seniors in the EU. This also includes securing freedom of 
movement for people on guaranteed income pensions so they can access their pensions wherever 
they live in the EU. We want poverty-proof pensions for all seniors in the EU from the age of 
retirement. At the same time, we encourage approaches that allow periods of transition between 
learning, working, family care, periods of unemployment, free time and retirement across different 
stages of an individual’s life. 

We want strong care services that benefit the wellbeing of people with long-term care needs, as well 
as their families and communities. Intergenerational justice is not just a concept: exchange between 
generations should be anchored in our educational systems, and also more broadly in community 
activities. 

For a Europe that is accessible for all 

People with disabilities in the European Union must be able to pursue a full participation in political, 
social, and public life, including employment. We will push for the effective monitoring and 
enforcement of European accessibility legislation and the introduction of Disability Card recognized 
across the EU. The EU should begin collecting disaggregated data by gender, age, and type of 
disability to assess the impact of EU policies and monitor progress on the inclusion of people with 
disabilities generally. 

A Union of Rights and Freedoms: Protecting the Rights of All  

Protecting the rights of all is a key battle against the far right. All over Europe, the far right is 
instrumentalizing migration to spread fear and resentment. They wish to rollback the rights and 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

freedoms of women and people from the LGBTQIA+ community as well as racialized people. We 
are fighting against this backlash, standing resolutely for democracy, freedom, and human rights.  

Upholding human rights with a humane asylum system 

We uphold a fair asylum system that defends human rights and dignity, based on solidarity and 
responsibility sharing. We are convinced that when the political will is there the European Union can 
tackle humanitarian challenges and protect the people seeking safety with humanity. As we uphold 
the fundamental principles of the European Union, the right to asylum is not up for negotiation.  

We want to work towards a human asylum system with fast and decentralized procedures. Member 
states must fairly share the responsibility for asylum applications. For us, it is clear that we need a 
mandatory relocation mechanism. Parties across the political spectrum let themselves be dragged 
towards far-right migration policies, as the EU’s new Migration and Asylum Pact sadly reflects. The 
successful use of the Temporary Protection Directive in response to the refugee situation caused by 
the war in Ukraine should be replicated. 

We call for EU visas for Human Rights and Environmental Defenders. We aim to provide legal 
protection for people forcibly displaced due to the climate crisis and environmental disasters. This 
includes climate visas to allow victims of natural disasters to seek protection and security in the 
European Union and supporting processes that prevent statelessness caused by the climate crisis. 
The specific vulnerability of LGBTQIA+ asylum seekers must be addressed. 

End the criminalisation of people on the move 

There has been an intolerable escalation of violence against people seeking protection. We must 
stop violence, torture, and inhuman and degrading treatment at Europe’s borders. Illegal pushbacks 
at the borders of the EU must end. 

EU laws to harmonize standards on asylum procedures, reception conditions and safeguards must 
be enforced. We cannot accept imprisonment, mistreatment and abuse towards people seeking 
protection and a better life in the EU.  

Rescue is not a crime 

We call for an EU-funded and EU-led Search and Rescue Mission in the Mediterranean and 
strengthening the humanitarian mandate and responsibility of Frontex. We aim for a stronger control 
of the agency also through national parliaments together with the European Parliament. We want to 
end the criminalisation of humanitarian assistance, and prolific use of states of emergency to limit 
access to asylum and legitimate rights of oversight by civil society and media. People do not belong 
in prison simply for seeking asylum. Asylum seekers should be guaranteed access to legal help. 

No dirty deals with dictators 

We fiercely oppose so-called “migration deals”, such as that with Tunisia, where the EU pays off 
countries to keep out migrants. Any cooperation with third countries on migration needs a human 
rights assessment. Making development cooperation with third countries conditional on “migration 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

management” is unethical. We cannot accept that refugees and migrants are exploited for 
geopolitical gain. Human trafficking must never be a weapon of hybrid warfare. 

A fair migration policy for the benefit of all  

Throughout history, people have always moved from place to place. Migration is as old as history, 
and we must return to this pragmatism. Migration can benefit all. It can help address labour 
shortages – today a key economic challenge. Migrants make an essential contribution to the 
European economy and enrich our culture, communities, and daily lives.  

The establishment of legal and accessible channels for migration is a necessary precondition for 
ending human trafficking and exploitation. We want to develop a new, comprehensive Migration 
Code, providing for visa opportunities for family reunification and work at different skills levels. It 
should also allow migrants already in the EU to change their status, for instance from student to 
employee. We want to make it easier for newcomers to work and integrate through access to 
education, language support and job opportunities.  

To prevent the exploitation of migrant workers, access to justice needs to be ensured in all EU 
countries. We call for a comprehensive campaign to regularize long-term “sans-papiers” living in EU 
countries. Whatever their status, people coming to the European Union to build a life should enjoy 
equal social, cultural, economic, and civic rights including freedom of movement, the right to work 
and social protection, and access to healthcare and education. 

Fight human trafficking and labour exploitation 

We want to combat human trafficking and labour exploitation in the EU. We want to protect victims, 
for example, through protection programmes and residency rights. Through recognising the 
universality of labour rights, we can effectively address severe labour exploitation, which can result 
in human trafficking. All workers, regardless of their residence status, have rights protecting them 
from illegal labour abuses under EU victims’ rights and anti-trafficking legislation. These rights must 
become a reality. 

For a fair and safe digital world 

As the digital world has become an integral part of our lives, the same freedoms and protections 
that exist offline should exist in online spaces. Preventing the spread of online hate is key to making 
sure that certain groups are not excluded from the political arena. Countering disinformation is 
essential for functioning and trusted democratic institutions.  

The EU has made progress on the fight against disinformation and the regulation of online platforms 
with the Digital Services Act. Now its provisions must be enforced. Online platforms must protect 
legal content and be subject to public scrutiny and transparency on the removal of illegal content. 

Women and racialized people suffer from disproportionate amounts of online hate. The internet 
must be free from illegal hate speech and discrimination. The EU should use its powers to make 
particularly harmful manifestations of hate chargeable as EU crimes with minimum rules regarding 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

their definition and related sanctions. We want to give support to platforms, civil society 
organizations, and media initiatives promoting media literacy and anti-hate strategies. 

GDPR is protecting our right to privacy, even from governmental surveillance. We will push for the 
right not to be tracked. The EU must lead in the global battle against mass surveillance. Adequate 
EU legislation must protect citizens against the abuse of spyware and stop member states from 
evading accountability by evoking national security. 

Putting humans at the centre in artificial intelligence  

Artificial intelligence harbours key potential but can also create significant challenges for society. To 
address any risks, we will implement the principle that humans must remain in control of AI systems 
and that these systems respect human autonomy, dignity, and decision-making authority. Artificial 
intelligence must work for people, society, and planet, not for surveillance states or tech capitalism.  

Strict limits should therefore be enforced. The most unethical and undemocratic practices in the EU, 
such as biometric mass surveillance, AI systems that recognize emotions, gender or sexual 
orientation, and AI-based predictive policing should not be permitted. Non-discrimination laws and 
data protection laws must be strengthened and enforced to guarantee that AI systems do not 
discriminate against racialized communities. Cybersecurity efforts must be increased to prevent AI-
based hacking attacks, with a special emphasis on protecting critical infrastructure. The design and 
use of AI systems must be transparent. Applications such as deepfakes and chatbots must be 
clearly labelled as such. 

We also want to ensure AI promotes, not hampers, the Green Deal with key environmental 
provisions. In the workplace, workers should always be able to disconnect from AI systems. 
Copyright legislation should be properly enforced in the context of AI models to fully protect content 
creators. We support the concept of “data dignity”, which means that data generated by human 
actions cannot be harvested for free by commercial AI developers, but first and foremost belongs to 
the humans that created it. 

For a strong and dynamic civic space  

Civil society organizations (CSO) are at the heart of every democracy. This is why we want to make 
them strong and truly European. We call for an EU mechanism to protect civil society, activists, and 
defenders from all forms of attacks, discrimination, and harassment. An EU mechanism should 
allow CSOs to report these attacks, including through an early warning system. Adequate funding 
should also be guaranteed, both at EU and national levels.  

Measures to support a regular, meaningful, and structured dialogue with civil society during 
legislative procedures are essential. We will introduce a statute for European cross-border 
associations and non-profit organisations. We advocate for an EU-level civil dialogue, modelled on 
the social dialogue, between CSOs and EU institutions.  

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Free and independent media for Europe 

Media concentration has reached alarming levels, threatening editorial and economic 
independence. The protection of journalistic sources is hampered by sweeping anti-terrorism laws 
and far-reaching mass surveillance measures. Defamation suits and abusive judicial proceedings 
have become key methods to gag investigative journalists. 

We need an EU framework to prevent media concentration and enable journalists to work freely. 
Investigative journalism needs dedicated safeguards. Free and independent journalism must never 
be a question of the necessary finances. We want to closely monitor the application of EU law, in 
particular EU laws on copyright, trade secrets, the data protection regulation, and the Audio-visual 
Media Services Directive to ensure they are not abused. We will work towards the proper 
implementation of the future Media Freedom Act and anti-SLAPPs (Strategic Lawsuits against 
Public Participation) directive. 

We support the emergence of pan-European media outlets and quality content on European affairs, 
European citizenship, and European identity, as core elements for a shared European civic and 
information space, dispelling EU-related myths and building a sense of European belonging. 

Culture as the spark of change 

Art and culture are some of society’s most powerful tools to tell stories, change minds, and build 
solidarity. Our rich cultural heritage and our diverse and vibrant arts scene are core features of what 
unites Europe and makes it unique and attractive. As Greens, we believe in the value of artistic 
expression in and of itself and as an essential part of our democracy. We also believe that the 
worlds of culture and creativity can play an important political role in helping us imagine solutions to 
the challenges of our time. We want to support the freedom of cultural expression through public 
funding and by defending it against attacks from far-right forces. 

The ability to produce together is a truly transformative aspect of the Creative Europe programme. 
Continued support for the production and distribution of art and culture produced across Europe, 
particularly supporting experimentation and diversity of expressions and organizational forms, is 
essential. 

We will push for an EU strategy to engage the cultural sectors in our Green and Social Deal and in 
any constituent process on the future of Europe. Cultural diplomacy and exchange should form part 
of the accession process for all countries looking to join the EU. 

Learning the difficult lessons of the pandemic, we call for common European standards on 
employment, social guarantees and working conditions in the cultural and creative sectors. We want 
to create a European Artist Status setting up a common framework to ensure good working 
conditions and minimum standards for artists and cultural workers across member states, 
particularly in relation to streaming platforms. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Defending Schengen, enjoying free movement 

Freedom of movement – the right of people to travel and move around the European Union freely 
and without hindrance – has touched and shaped the lives of EU citizens like no other achievement. 
Millions of people have built lives and relationships in EU countries other than their own and millions 
more regularly cross national borders for professional opportunities and leisure.  

As the border checks in the pandemic reminded us, the days of queuing at the border are thankfully 
behind us. We intend to keep it that way. The European institutions should act to reverse the steady 
re-emergence and illegally unlimited maintenance of border checks within the Schengen area, 
especially based on the justification of migration. As EU members who have met all the 
requirements for Schengen membership, Bulgaria and Romania should be welcomed so their 
citizens can enjoy their full rights as EU citizens. 

Policing without prejudice 

No one in the European Union is above the law, including police and security agencies. This core 
principle that protects everybody’s fundamental rights is regularly undermined, seen in all too often 
cases of police brutality.  

To protect the rights of racialized groups disproportionately at risk of police violence and profiling, 
the EU’s Race Equality Directive should be updated to explicitly cover policing and institutional 
violence. With the right to protest increasingly under threat, we will defend the right to assembly and 
peacefully demonstrate in line with international and European law. 

A European fight against organized crime 

Organized crime harms our democracies, puts lives at risk, and destroys local environments. As 
organized crime is transnational, it can only be fought through European cooperation. We support 
policies that improve exchange and information flows between European police and intelligence 
services and would create a Europe-wide exchange programme for police officers. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Chapter III: Courage to Take Responsibility – Building a Union of Security, Peace and Global 
Justice  

Yulia left her farm four months into the fighting. The harvest had always been the best time of year, 
but this year it was too dangerous. There was nowhere for the grain to go anyway. 

The Russian blockade was a tragedy for Yulia as it was for the millions who depended on Ukrainian 
food exports around the world. Just as Ukraine’s economy has been shaped by Russian needs over 
centuries, unjust trade and the afterlives of colonialism mean that entire regions do not provide for 
their own food needs. Heat waves and droughts make this bad situation worse. 

We need a global just transition, because our future is everyone’s future and everyone’s future is 
our future. Peace, prosperity, and sustainability go hand in hand. The world cannot have one, while 
it ignores another. 

Insecurity and conflicts are growing, from wars to genocidal attempts, while autocratic regimes 
endanger democratic values and international dialogue. 

The full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine was a turning point in the history of our continent and the 
world. It violates the rule of international law, peace, and security. 

As Greens, we stand firm in our undivided solidarity with and support for Ukraine and for continued 
financial and military support. The struggle of the people of Ukraine for freedom, peace, and joining 
the European Union is our struggle. 

It is not only Ukraine. Globally, peace and security are under threat. Painful conflicts are raging in 
the Middle East, the Caucasus, the Sahel, and Central Africa. 

Growing tensions and shrinking space for democracy and civil society threaten the integrity of the 
international system and the hope for a better world. Europe’s dependence on authoritarian regimes 
blinded us to this reality for too long. 

The accelerating climate crisis, natural disasters, and the race for resources sit alongside the global 
inequality that remains baked into economic relations, trade deals, and multilateral institutions. 
Colonialism and its legacy are still with us. 

In today’s world, we believe the European Union must be a strong player. The EU is and has always 
been a peace project. We must be able to stand up for the EU’s security as well as peace and 
universal values in our neighbourhood and the world. 

Human rights and economic prosperity cannot be a luxury for the world’s richest. Global justice, 
good governance, and democratic norms and institutions help a country flourish. They are essential 
for a secure, cooperative, and peaceful world. 

A global just transition from which all countries and regions can benefit is key to that future. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Our answer starts with the EU achieving greater security in geopolitical and economic terms and 
acting as one internationally. For the EU, our security also depends on our support for Ukraine. 

We will make values, peace, and reconciliation priorities for the EU’s international policies, building 
a more stable world through human security, diplomacy and conflict prevention. The EU must be 
ready to work with all friends of peace, human rights, and multilateralism to these ends. 

We have the courage to make the EU a force for a different, more just world. 

Europe’s green transition is both a geopolitical tool and a global responsibility. Climate diplomacy 
and cooperation on green technology and investment are key to how we will deal with the world. 

We will fight for global justice. The EU can rewrite unjust trade rules to make the world fairer and 
more equal. All countries must have a stake in the new decarbonized global economy. 

A secure and peaceful world, where Europe works with partners to put people and planet before 
war and exploitation. 

This is the future we want, and that Europe can help build. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

A Union for Peace, Cooperation and Human Rights 

Security policy is at and will stay at the centre of the EU agenda. As Greens, we are convinced that 
the EU needs a new mindset and a clear willingness to act.  

It is time to rejuvenate multilateralism and values-based foreign policy. The European Union has 
grown strong through integration, sharing and connection – not decoupling or building walls. What 
we endeavoured to do with the European project must also guide our international relations. We 
need to stand in solidarity with our partners and knit an expanded network of ties and strategic 
partnerships working together in an ever-more complex and interconnected world.  

The green transition has always also been a question of security. With more control over our energy 
system, crucial technologies, and vital supply chains, the EU can make a greater impact in foreign 
policy and towards a globally just transition. It is an opportunity for the EU to become a more 
effective actor alongside its partners and multilateral institutions, advancing peace and security as 
well as universal values, Sustainable Development Goals, human rights, and democracy around the 
world. 

Cooperation based on universal values and principles 

The EU must prioritize cooperation and alliance building with democratic partners to defend human 
rights, universal values, and a rules-based international order. We need to act with our allies and 
like-minded partners wherever possible while retaining the ability to act independently when 
needed. 

As Greens, we envisage a European Union that works closely with democracies and like-minded 
partners to stand up to aggressors worldwide and create new ties for multilateral cooperation 
outside the Global North. The EU must be ready to work with all parties committed to peace, human 
rights, multilateralism, and international law. 

Multilateralism and cooperation for global security 

Peace and freedom are built through values-based and fair dealings with our partners. We believe 
in international solidarity and multilateralism. The United Nations upholds our shared global values, 
and we will defend it against attacks and advocate for reforms to enhance transparency, 
accountability, and effectiveness. 

In these challenging times, the EU must actively seek out all opportunities for international 
cooperation and use all channels of cooperation to preserve peace, also within the OSCE. The 
multilateral system must be strengthened through fair representation for the Global South, for 
example on the UN Security Council and in international financial institutions. We advocate for a 
reform the of UN system, especially the UNSC, to ensure fair and proportionate representation of all 
world regions and make it possible for regional organisations such as the EU to become full 
members. The veto in the Security Council must be abolished to promote international decision-
making and move away from a hegemonic system. 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

Global security can only be achieved by upholding, promoting and developing international law. As 
Greens, we will make sure that the EU uses its international influence to motivate countries, such as 
the United States, to join the Rome Statute and the International Criminal Court, to make sure that 
human rights are protected globally. 

The European Union must stand for international human rights and the protection of international 
humanitarian law. As such, it is our shared responsibility to make sure that no war crime or 
violations of human rights goes unpunished. This engagement is the best way to achieve 
multilateralism based on the strength of international law, not might is right. 

For the EU, a multilateral approach also includes strengthening and deepening cooperation with 
NATO, while respecting a clear division of competences and without setting precedence. Member 
states decide for themselves about NATO membership. The EU has a collective duty to safeguard 
its security from the oscillations of external actors and create the conditions to allow the EU to freely 
determine its engagement in the rapidly shifting geopolitical environment. 

A new peace contract for Europe 

With increasing conflicts around the world, including in the European neighbourhood, the EU must 
work with international partners to build peace and reduce the risk of conflicts. We will take a 
transformational approach to tackle the root causes of conflict, strengthening civilian conflict 
prevention, mediation, and reconciliation as well as crisis management beyond borders, including 
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, and enforcement. 

The climate-security nexus is about more than the EU’s own stability. Climate and environmental 
initiatives as well as efforts that strengthen the political, social, and economic participation of women 
are essential to building peace and providing security through development. Their funding must rise 
in step with any increase in military spending. 

Military interventions must only ever be the last resort. They must be based on long-term political 
strategies, comply with international law, and subject to the relevant parliamentary approval and 
oversight. We support the development of a European security union within existing structures 
based on these principles. 

Regarding the Middle East conflict, we will push for the EU to relaunch political negotiations towards 
a two-state solution, based on secure and agreed borders. Lasting peace in the region requires 
negotiated outcomes that respect the right of both Israel and Palestine to exist as democratic and 
sovereign states and the Palestinian people to a home of their own. We demand full accountability 
through independent investigations into all potential violations of international law by all parties. We 
call on the EU and its member states to support the work of the International Criminal Court and the 
International Court of Justice. 

Cyprus still suffers under military occupation following the Turkish invasion of 1974. The 
geographical separation of Cypriots based on ethnic origin and religion violates European 
fundamental freedoms and human rights. We call for the resumption of talks on a solution to the 
Cyprus issue under the auspices of the UN. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

A European Security Union 

As no country can face the threats to security alone, the EU must develop a Security Union that 
centres human security and people’s needs. This approach is essential to protect human rights, 
prevent conflict, and create and maintain peace.  

Security is about strong civil societies, the global just transition and long-term preventative 
strategies and not only about defence. Not only the short but the long term is our horizon of action, 
not only conventional conflicts but hybrid threats are our targets, not only states but civil societies. 
We advocate for a strong European External Action Service as a force for truly transnational 
diplomacy that can fight impunity and build reconciliation and lasting peace. 

Within the European Union, we demand a credible policy of solidarity and mutual assistance in line 
with article 42(7) of the Treaty of the European Union. This means cooperation on military 
capabilities and creating synergies, for example through promoting interoperability and coordinating 
procurement, maintenance, and supply systems. The increasing threat of disinformation and 
interference in sovereign democracies must be met by cybersecurity efforts. 

No longer relying on authoritarian regimes  

We must not repeat mistakes of the past. For too long, the European Union and its members were 
complacent about economic dependence on authoritarian regimes. Lulled by fossil fuels, the EU 
ignored Putin’s rising authoritarianism, human rights violations, and the threat his regime posed to 
international security. We Greens will make sure that Europe does not make the same mistake 
again with other war-mongering regimes around the world. 

We recognize the threat posed by China towards Taiwan that puts international peace and security 
in jeopardy. We advocate for an active, clear-eyed, and common EU policy on China. The EU must 
implement a robust human rights policy that starts with de-risking our supply chains and increasing 
our self-sufficiency in a world with increasing climate instability and political tensions, while 
acknowledging that interdependence is a key factor for a peaceful international system and a global 
just transition. 

Fighting for global human rights 

Civil society organizations are crucial for human rights, democracy and self-determination and 
fighting corruption and discrimination. They are the EU’s natural allies who can change the world for 
the better. However, human rights around the world are too often not safe. Environmentalists, 
investigative journalists, women, members of the LGBTQIA+ community, land and indigenous rights 
defenders, trade unionists and progressive politicians around the world are intimidated, subjected to 
smear campaigns, imprisoned on trumped-up charges, and, in the worst cases, murdered. 

As Greens, we will fully implement the EU guidelines on human rights defenders and provide easier 
access to visas. We want the EU to provide more support to civil society generally, for example 
through sustainable funding. Transnational repression by authoritarian regimes must be a priority for 
human rights protection. 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

No peace without women: for a feminist foreign policy 

Women and marginalized groups continue to have limited access to power across the world. A 
feminist foreign policy will put gender equality and human security at the core of our foreign and 
security policy. Societies will be more peaceful and prosperous when everyone plays an equal part 
in political, social, and economic life.  

As Greens, we will push for a feminist foreign policy at EU level that implements intersectional 
strategies. We need to ensure political and civic participation of girls, women, and marginalized 
groups as well as an inclusive quality education for girls and young women. We must promote the 
economic empowerment of girls, women, and marginalized groups as a key foreign policy objective. 
This includes the creation of a fund to support local feminist organizations. 

No arms exports to dictators and authoritarian regimes 

Global arms spending is higher than ever and has increased every year since 2015. We advocate 
for nuclear and conventional arms control and disarmament, including a ban on autonomous lethal 
weapons and support for the nuclear ban treaty and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. We 
advocate the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We call for an EU-level arms 
export policy that prohibits arms exports to authoritarian regimes, dictatorships and human rights 
abusers while supporting countries defending themselves against aggressors. Comprehensive 
monitoring mechanisms for arms exports to all partners must be introduced. 

Justice and Development through the Global Green Deal 

The European Union must use its influence, power, and resources to build global justice and enable 
a Global Green Deal. The accelerating climate crisis is undermining peace and prosperity the world 
over. The future of the climate depends on every country in the world taking action and stopping 
fossil fuels. 

For centuries, we have been exploiting the Global South, hindering development by imposing 
economic structures and exploiting people, land, and resources. Global justice, in action and not 
just words, is an ethical responsibility but also a geopolitical need. 

Our proposals combine international partnerships and trade reform with international cooperation on 
equal terms and humanitarian initiatives. They are rooted in our commitment to global justice and 
the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as our awareness of colonialism’s persistent legacy. 

Recognizing our responsibilities through climate diplomacy 

We want climate diplomacy to be central to the EU’s relations with its global partners. The EU must 
recognize the role European countries have made in contributing to placing the Global South at the 
front line of the climate crisis. As set out in the Paris Agreement, the EU must honour commitments 
to providing international climate finance for mitigation and adaptation in line with its fair share and 
make multi-year pledges to the new Loss and Damage Fund. The EU can lead the way by building 
high-ambition climate coalitions on investment, sectoral and technological priorities for 
decarbonisation.  

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

We will fight for policy coherence across all internal policies to reflect their global implications with a 
legislative check for how they will help reach the Sustainable Development Goals and avoid any 
negative impact on third countries’ ability to achieve them. As Greens, we go beyond the do-no-
harm-principle. We will use all tools at hand to engage with partners to jointly change people’s lives 
for the better and act against the climate crisis, biodiversity loss, and environmental degradation. 
We will continue our push for the international recognition of the crime of ecocide. 

Green Deal partnerships for global justice 

We want the EU to make Green Deal Partnerships with countries, regions, and civil society actors to 
support the necessary Global Green Deal with investment, access to technology, and expertise. We 
want the EU to shape and share the technological development and economic frameworks of the 
decarbonized world, including by facilitating technology transfer to the Global South. 

Initiatives such as the Global Gateway and Just Energy Transition Partnerships must become key 
vehicles for opening green and resilient development pathways with partners and regions. The EU 
should seek to unlock as much investment in the green transition globally as it spends in the EU. 

For resource justice, against extractivism 

Countries around the world must benefit so the green transition does not become a race that 
excludes the Global South. At the same, the EU’s immediate need for metals and other resources 
cannot be satisfied without access to new materials. The EU must therefore speed up its transition 
towards a fully circular economy to reuse materials as long as possible and meet ambitious 
resource reduction targets. Furthermore, it needs to enable resource-rich countries to extract, 
process, and recycle raw materials, while prioritizing a “people and planet” approach that protects 
the rights of communities, especially those of Indigenous people, nature, and biodiversity.  

The Global South must be supported so that extraction can be done according to the same 
conditions as within the EU. The EU’s resource needs should not further exacerbate existing 
inequalities, nor climate and environmental injustice. Our sufficiency approach, backed up by 
reduction and recycling targets within the EU, will help minimize the global mining sector’s huge 
impact in terms of human rights violations, environment destruction, and climate. 

Resource justice also entails stopping dumping our waste in countries in the Global South. It is 
therefore important to adopt clear end-of-waste criteria at the EU level, such as for plastics and 
textiles, to avoid the classification of waste as second-hand goods. This step would also stimulate 
the development of recycling activities, skills and capacities in the EU. We call for a collective 
purchasing strategy and cooperation for rare-earth elements. The use of such elements should be 
prioritized for those industries most relevant to the ecological transition. 

Decolonize now! 

The legacy of the colonial era still weighs heavily on relations between certain European countries 
and their former colonies. It is reflected in the unequal global distribution of wealth, ongoing 
economic dependencies and unjust economic structures, and lack of representation in our 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

institutions as well as globally. We want the EU to face up to its historical responsibility arising from 
the crimes of colonialism and its legacy. 

We call for a deep comprehensive and inclusive review of Europe’s colonial legacy to ensure 
reparation, which can be material and symbolic, as well as accountability for past crimes. We 
support the push for the return of cultural artifacts. We want to correct disadvantageous clauses in 
trade agreements and push for reforms in development banks. The EU and its member states must 
work for sound debt restructuring and debt relief for particularly burdened countries. Official 
development assistance must be allocated in consultation with partners and civil society, in 
particular at the local level, and ensure local needs are met. Moving beyond a post-colonial posture 
means that EU external action should not put European interests or those of European companies 
over and above those of its partners. 

From development aid to a global just transition 

Europe needs to increase flows to the official development assistance, as defined by OECD, to at 
least 0.7% of member states’ gross national incomes. International cooperation and development 
policies must be guided by a decolonial and anti-racist perspective. 

Guided by the Sustainable Development Goals, we want to coordinate locally led sustainable 
initiatives better and increase funding to grassroots civil society, in line with the OECD DAC 
recommendation, avoiding duplication and wasting resources. We will follow a detailed approach to 
scrutinize and align the EU international cooperation budget with Agenda 2030, focusing on global 
justice, tackling inequalities, ensuring that most official development assistance is directed towards 
priority needs such as public services and basic social services and transparency for private sector 
involvement. The EU must reconvene the Multi-stakeholder Platform on Sustainable Development 
Goals. 

We want to promote local knowledge and local initiatives to support the development of economic 
cycles and social security systems. To this end, we want to further develop the existing European 
development cooperation in dialogue with our partners. We reject tying international aid and 
assistance to migration deals. The integrity of development assistance cooperation must be 
maintained and closely monitored. 

Ending global hunger: food sovereignty for all 

The multiple crises of our time, first and foremost the climate crisis, pose existential challenges to 
food security worldwide. To end hunger, the EU must work for a sustainable and resilient global 
food system and contribute to the implementation of the right to food. The EU must prioritize 
agroecological approaches and align its own food and trade policy with the principles of global food 
sovereignty and climate-friendly agriculture. 

Supporting global justice with sustainable trade 

The current model of most EU free trade agreements, such as EU-Mercosur, primarily benefits 
agribusiness and multinationals. It fails to adequately address the socio-economic and sustainability 
impacts of trade. EU trade policy is not sufficiently aligned to the Green Deal. As Greens, we believe 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

in a global trading system that is based on equity, shapes globalization for the better, and puts 
human wellbeing at its centre. We believe in reshaping the EU’s trade policy towards sustainable 
development and stronger human rights protection. The EU should only enter new trade deals with 
countries that implement the Paris Agreement. 

Our Green Partnerships and the EU’s new carbon tariff system (Carbon Border Adjustment 
Mechanism, CBAM) can create fair competition by making decarbonisation and environmental 
protection a joint effort. For the CBAM to be effective and fair, it must be complemented with higher 
EU spending on climate action in low-income countries. 

The Greens successfully introduced and promoted legislation on due diligence, deforestation, and 
forced-labour-free supply chains, setting standards for imports into the EU. All multinational 
companies operating in the EU must be held accountable for upholding these standards and pay 
their fair share of taxes inside and outside the EU. We will continue by updating the Public 
Procurement Directive and introducing a new Unfair Trading Practice for the textile sector.  

We advocate rebalancing the global system of intellectual property rights to ensure the Global 
South can access key technologies, including for health and decarbonization. As Greens, we will 
push for progress in the World Trade Organization reform to support a global just transition. 

Remodel trade deals to protect social rights, environment and climate  

As Greens, we will push to improve bilateral trade and investment agreements with binding and 
sanctionable sustainability provisions. Specifically, the Paris Agreement, the Kunming-Montreal 
biodiversity agreement, the Sustainable Development Goals, and the ILO core conventions should 
become essential elements of our trade agreements. They need to be horizontally anchored in all 
chapters of trade deals, from raw materials and agriculture to procurement. 

Impact assessments for trade deals should include human rights, gender, biodiversity, and animal 
welfare. The precautionary principle needs to be fully respected and International Labour 
Organization standards fully implemented. Pre-ratification commitments, a European Parliament 
vote on the mandate, and full transparency shall ensure democratic legitimacy and the inclusion of 
civil society and trade unions. 

We fight to end protections for fossil fuel investment and instead incentivize sustainable investment. 
The move to exit the climate-destroying Energy Charter Treaty is a major success. All investment 
agreements need to fully respect the right to regulate. We advocate abolishing Investor State 
Dispute Settlement mechanisms and their replacement with a multilateral investment court system. 

Trade rules should not impede climate action, nor limit our ability to enact social and environmental 
policies. On the contrary, trade must be part of our efforts to limit emissions, switch to net-zero 
technologies, and end ecological degradation. Trade of sustainable goods and services should be 
facilitated, so that they will become cheaper and broadly available. Any product too dangerous for 
use in the EU is also too dangerous for use in other countries. Goods that are not authorized to be 
sold in the EU should not be exported to third countries.  

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
As adopted by the 7th Extended Congress, Lyon, 4th February 2024 

We want to promote food sovereignty and prioritize local and regional food supply chains. Trade 
agreements should not disrupt or undermine environmentally valuable local or regional productive 
environments. EU citizens have the right to expect that all imported food products meet international 
and EU rules, such as phytosanitary requirements, antibiotics, and animal welfare standards. 

Freer trade should be paired with measures to limit environmentally harmful subsidies, including 
those for fossil fuels. Trade agreements should include measures to phase-out fossil fuels and other 
environmentally harmful subsidies. 

Making trade fair for all 

As Greens, we push for strategies to integrate fair trade principles into key EU policies related to 
production, consumption, and trade, promoting living incomes and wages, inclusive decision-making 
involving smallholder farmers, artisans, and workers, and supporting measures to reduce pesticide 
usage in third countries. We demand that companies adopt sustainable purchasing practices and 
adapt their business models in such a way that decouples economic success from exploitation in 
supply chains, including through the promotion of mission-led business models. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
