EUROPEAN ELECTIONS 
MANIFESTO 2024 

1

Principles and Proposals 
of the European Left 

The upcoming elections to the European Parliament will take place under extraordinary circumstances. 

Europe has become the fastest warming continent in the world and the phase-out of fossil fuels must 

be accelerated. Many European citizens are struggling with a cost-of-living crisis while billions of euros 

are being spent in the EU on an unprecedented military build-up, and a return to the failed policies 

of neoliberal austerity is even on the horizon. Finally, the elections are being overshadowed by wars 

taking place on European soil and in its near vicinity. These elections are therefore not second-order 

elections. If you want your voices to be heard, we call on all democratic European citizens, who form 

the social majority, to participate and vote in the European elections for a democratic, peaceful social, 

and ecological Europe.

The extreme nationalist and neo-fascist right, which is already governing in some countries and is 

knocking on the doors of power in others, can and must be stopped. Fighting fascism in whatever 

form it appears is a core element of the programme and history of the Party of the European Left (EL). 

These  ideas  must  be  combated  and  uprooted  from  our  societies.  This  struggle  can  be  won  if  the 

interests of the people and the desire of Europeans for social justice, ecological security and peace 

are placed at the heart of political decision-making.

2

Fighting Neo-Fascism

Our parties are rooted in the ﬁght against fascism and war. We ﬁnd strength in that fact, and we will 

also build upon and extend the hard-won victories of today, in Latin America and elsewhere, where 

the people are mobilising for a different vision of society and defeating hate and fear. Anti-fascist and 

left forces must build international cooperation to support and popularise this vision – and to reject 

the growing anticommunism that goes hand-in-hand with the rise of the far right. Less socialism will 

mean more fascism and more barbarism.

We propose the following initiatives:

 Full  implementation  of  the  European  Parliament  Resolution  on  the  increase  in  neo-fascist

violence and a ban on all neo-fascist and neo-Nazi organisations and foundations;

 Building of a European anti-fascist centre for documentation, scientiﬁc research and education;

 Declaration of 25 April as European Day of the Fight against Fascism.

3

Our victory is peace!

Now more than ever we need to adopt a broad concept of security that addresses the existential 

threats we are facing – climate change, poverty, and war.

We  condemn  Russia’s  military  aggression  against  Ukraine,  which  is  a  crime  under  international 

humanitarian law. The immediate steps to stop the war must be a return to the negotiation table, a 

ceasefire,  and  a  withdrawal  of  all  Russian  troops  from  Ukraine.  We  are  in  favour  of  peace 

negotiations. We are in favour of sanctions against the Russian military-industrial complex. 

We  call  for  sanctions  against  the  US  military-industrial  complex  for  supporting  the  aggression  by 

the  government  of  the  state of Israel. Israel must end this barbaric war and the violence in the West 

Bank. We have condemned the Hamas massacre of 7 October. We call for an immediate ceasefire, 

the  provision  of  humanitarian  aid  to  the  people  of  Gaza  and  Israel’s  immediate  withdrawal  from 

all  the  territories  it  occupies.  Israel  must  implement  the  judgement  of  the  International  Court  of 

Justice,  which  obliges  it  to  refrain  from  any  action that could lead to genocide in Gaza. For this 

reason, the EU must apply effective economic and political sanctions to put pressure on the Israeli 

government. We stand with the left and progressive forces  in  Israel  in  calling  for  an  end  to  the 

war.  The  world  can  no  longer  tolerate  the  systematic  oppression  of  the  Palestinians.  The 

Palestinian people must be granted the right to self-determination in  an  independent,  viable  state 

alongside Israel within the 1967 borders. 

Alongside the suffering in Ukraine and Palestine, we must not lose sight of the 22 other wars that 

are being  waged  around  the  world:  in  Yemen,  Syria,  Sudan,  Western  Sahara,  against  the  Kurdish 

people  and  elsewhere.  We  are  living  through  a  ‘world  war  in  instalments’,  which  could  rapidly 

escalate into a worldwide nuclear disaster. Preventing this is the most important task.

We  do  not  want  Europe  to  become  the  arena  of  a  new  Cold  War  and  an  arms  race.  We  want 

Europe to take responsibility for its security autonomously and independently of the USA, based on 

multilateralism and respect for international law. We are working for a Europe of peace and solidarity, 

constantly  advocating  diplomatic  solutions  for  international  conﬂicts.  We  need  a  new  approach  to 

4

security,  based  on  the  recognition  that  no  state  or  community  can  be  secure  unless  others  share 

the same level of security. Instead of militarising the EU, Europe needs a political agenda for peace, 

security, and disarmament.

We continue to speak out against the expansion of NATO and the new arms race in Europe. 

The 50th anniversary of the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation (OSCE) is an 

opportunity to recall and revive the concept of common security in the European house. 

Neutrality and non-alignment can become role models for a peaceful European security order.

Our proposals for immediate action:

 Include the rejection of war as an instrument for the resolution of international disputes as

one of the fundamental principles of the EU;

 End the arms race in Europe: No new nuclear arms in Europe. Make Europe a nuclear weapon

free continent!

 Fully implement the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), sign and ratify

the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) and reduce the percentage of GDP

going to military expenditure;

 Respect  the  ‘Irish  Clause’  (Art.  24  and  42  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union):  the  common

security  and  defence  policy  of  the  Union  ‘shall  not  prejudice  the  speciﬁc  character  of  the

security and defence policy of certain Member States’;

 We  support  the  aspirations  of  the  Irish  people  to  reunite  their  nation  divided  by  British

colonialism;

 We call for an end to the Turkish occupation of Cyprus and the reuniﬁcation of the country

according to the UN resolutions and the European Union acquis;

 We call for the demilitarisation of the island, and respect for its nonaligned status.

5

Social transformation towards 

an integral ecology

The European Left recognises the climate crisis as an emergency and is committed to transforming 

the economy away from unlimited growth and dependence on fossil fuels, thus creating the conditions 

for a just green transition that ensures job creation, fair distribution of wealth, sound and universal 

public services and public ownership of the commons.

We need to undergo signiﬁcant social and economic transformations to reach the Paris Agreement 

targets and thus guarantee that the next generation will still have the right to a sustainable future 

on a healthy planet. We need to promote a new green social contract based on justice and respect. 

Justice  is  about  the  inalienable  right  of  every  citizen  to  live  in  a  clean  and  healthy  environment. 

Respect is about our minimum duty towards nature and towards future generations. Wars and the 

global arms race are key factors inﬂuencing the environmental crisis. Peace is therefore key to this 

socio-ecological and eco-social transformation.

The European Left have a clear concept of this ecological, energy, and industrial transformation. While 

technology will play an important role, this transition relates above all to a societal transformation of 

how we produce and consume, adapted to the real needs of the population and to the limits of the 

planet. Radical environmental change goes hand-in-hand with the ﬁght for social justice and the ﬁght 

to combat market domination for a just transition towards green economies. The creative capacities 

of the working classes are the key to tackling the ecological and social crisis. We support the trade 

unions’  concepts  of  a  democratically  conceived  just  transition  to  a  new  digitalised  and  ecological 

economy that leaves no-one behind.

No  worker  should  end  up  unemployed  because  of  the  ecological  and  energy  transition  which, 

alongside a reduction in environmentally harmful jobs, must bring the expansion of other, green forms 

of employment. We therefore demand massive European investment plans so that companies and 

public services can create new jobs and train the people for them. Achieving the Paris climate goals 

is imperative.

6

The  European  Commission’s  ‘European  Green  Deal’  has  set  the  target  for  counteracting  climate 

change  and  initiating  an  ecological  turnaround.  Nevertheless,  it  remains  stuck  in  a  framework  of 

reconciliation with the capitalist system of production that must be overcome. A stronger momentum 

and a different perspective are needed. The European Left aims to contribute to the emergence of a 

progressive movement with the primary vocation of overcoming neoliberalism and a capitalist system 

that exploits nature, women, and men.

We are seeking to change the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy with the aim of gradually abolishing the 

system of allocating funds according to area and redirecting them towards environmentally friendly, 

sustainable agriculture. Sustainable agriculture should contribute to the attractiveness of rural areas, 

while labour-intensive agriculture must directly beneﬁt those who work the land, promoting a model 

of small, sustainable farms and healthy food in which products have a short commercial circuit.

Public  control  and  ownership  of  common  goods  and  services  with  democratic  and  participatory 

planning of the economy are essential to save humanity and the planet and to end social inequality.

Women’s  empowerment  and  leadership,  together  with  their  access  to  decision-making  on  equal 

terms, is an essential key factor in a just transition.

7

OUR proposals for immediate action:

 Increase  the  European  Union’s  target  for  reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from  55%  to

65%  by  2030  and  bring  forward  the  date  for  the  European  Union’s  climate  neutrality  from

2050 to 2035;

 Establish public control and ownership of common goods such as water, sanitation, and the

companies  that  provide  them;  of  hydrocarbons  and  other  energy  sources;  and  of  energy

production, transmission and distribution services. Reversal of the current energy union model

in favour of a model based on public ownership of resources, opening up a funding channel

for municipalities to achieve energy sovereignty;

 Incorporate criteria of economic rationality into water management, considering cost recovery,

including environmental costs and scarcity value, and taking into account social, environmental

and economic impacts, as well as geographical and climatic conditions;

 Establish an agro-ecological policy model for the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) based on

an  environmentally  sustainable  agriculture,  ensuring  fair  incomes  for  farmers  and  providing

quality food, soil protection, and food sovereignty as well as mitigating climate change;

 Implement  the  Sustainable  Mobility  Directive  for  sustainable  spatial  planning,  emphasising

public transport and resisting privatisation;

 Create  a  European  Fund  for  public  services,  ﬁnanced  at  0%  by  the  ECB,  with  democratic

governance, for investment, massive recruitment and training, particularly in transport (freight

and passengers), healthcare, and education;

 For the ecological and social transition of ﬁrms’ production: change the banking policy of the

ECB: low rate (0%, or less) for bank loans for investments that reduce carbon emissions and

create good jobs; high rates, even penalty rates, for loans that cut jobs, relocate or increase

polluting emissions (CO2, etc.);

 Dismantle  the  SUV  economy  through  regulations  that  ensure  carbon-neutral,  efficient,  and

road user-friendly car production. Impose equal taxes on aircraft and car fuels, eliminating CO2

exemptions. Ban private ﬂights, prioritise trains for journeys under two and a half hours, revive

night trains, and expand networks as needed. Enforce reduction and oversight of cruises;

 Integrate biodiversity into all sectoral policies, in particular energy, agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, 

transport, tourism and land-use planning, as a key cross-cutting element that shouldctraaction

when it becomes threatened.

8

Fight poverty, not the poor!

We  will  not  resign  ourselves  to  the  increase  in  poverty  in  Europe.  We  call  for  the  adoption  of  an 

integrated  anti-poverty  strategy  that  tackles  the  multidimensional  problem  of  poverty  and  social 

exclusion. 

The  rise  of  gentriﬁcation  and  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  platform  economy  in  real  estate 

and  tourism  deprive  citizens,  and  especially  young  people,  of  their  right  to  decent  and 

affordable  housing.  Moreover,  the  current  number  of  homeless  people  is  alarmingly  high,  while 

thousands  of  buildings  stand  vacant,  particularly  in  metropolitan  areas.  Decent,  affordable, 

and  climate  friendly  housing  must  become  a  right  and  not  be  viewed  as  a  commodity.  

Social protection cover for health, pensions, and unemployment must be universal for all people in 

the EU, wherever they come from.

We advocate universal and free access to health care and the strengthening of public health systems 

to reduce social inequalities. Public resources should be used only to create and strengthen public 

health systems. We call for basic energy security, that is, the legal right of all people to have free 

access to the amount of energy they need for heating and household purposes. This is a human right.

Feminist  economics  and  gender  equality  are  fundamental  to  a  human  economy;  they  are  a  core 

component of the new, fairer, human economy we want to achieve. It is now time to address and fully 

recognise the role of unpaid and underpaid care work. Society must invest in public care systems and 

address the disproportionate responsibility for care work borne by women and girls, supporting its 

defamilialisation and tackling women’s poverty. 

We want to build modern public services that are sufficiently staffed, de-bureaucratised, democratically 

and transparently managed and responsive to citizens’ needs. The EU must promote investments in 

free and accessible healthcare, education, transport, and telecommunications.

9

Our proposals for immediate action:

 Enshrine the right to affordable, decent housing for all people in Europe in EU primary law;

 Implement national and European investment plans for public housing and reconstruction of

the public infrastructure; ﬁnancing of social housing projects by national or local authorities,

non-proﬁt  developers  and  cooperatives  through  the  European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  at  0%

interest;

 Adopt an EU directive obliging Member States to introduce legal rent caps and prohibit ﬁxed-

term tenancies and forced evictions from primary residences; strengthening of tenants’ rights

in apartments owned by housing investors. These investment companies and their activities

must be limited so that they do not pose an undue risk to housing markets;

 Exempt public housing funding from internal market and competition rules;

 Create quality care structures for children, the elderly and the disabled in order to enhance the

sustainability of reproduction in an equitable manner;

 Adopt  an  EU  directive  that  caps  rents  and  obliges  local  authorities  to  provide  housing  for

students and learners; a regulatory framework for short-term rental platforms in major urban

areas coupled with public expenditure and European funds for the development of new homes;

 Adopt  an  EU  directive  against  social  inequalities  and  discrimination  in  education  based  on

class,  gender,  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  or  expression,  nationality,  residence

status, and religious belief;

 Halt  the  privatisation  of  education,  higher  education,  and  research;  only  public  funding  for

public institutions;

 Reserve 7% of EU GDP for education, research, and innovation;

 Abolish admission tests and tuition fees (including for non-EU and non-European students);

 The  allocation  of  European  study  and  research  grants  should  be  based  on  social  criteria

promoting European exchanges in training courses from secondary to university level;

 Ensure universal and free access to care and public health systems, including contraceptive

services and safe abortion throughout the EU, guaranteed by EU primary law;

 Create a European public pharmaceutical/medical hub;

 2% of EU GDP to be allocated to supporting culture;

 Adopt a basic European statute for intermittent artists.

1 0

Money and funds for people and the planet!

In order to safeguard and develop public services and enable a just transition to a digitalised and green 

economy, we must ﬁrst prevent the reintroduction of austerity. Our priority is a massive investment 

spending plan for the creation of green jobs, based on the revitalisation of SMEs and essential public 

services,  the  care  economy,  and  the  transformation  of  industry,  transport  and  energy  in  line  with 

the needs of the population and the limits of the planet. This requires mobilising ﬁnancial resources 

that exceed the EU budget and the NextGenerationEU development fund many times over. These 

funds could be made available if we manage to form a willing, progressive majority within European 

institutions.

Public budgets must be freed from the stranglehold of the ﬁnancial markets. We call for the redistribution 

of a large part of the 460 billion euros that Europe today spends on armaments towards projects for 

social and ecological transformation.

The energy companies have reaped huge proﬁts from the price increases due to the war in Ukraine, 

and these need to be given back to society.  We call for the abolition of tax havens in the EU and the 

establishment of a common minimum level of taxation of proﬁts and large assets in the EU.

Our proposals for immediate action:

 Abolish the Stability and Growth Pact and replace it with a new pact focusing on social and

environmental restructuring, allowing for expansionary and counter-cyclical policies;

 Transform  the  Recovery  and  Resilience  Facility  (RRF)  into  a  permanent  EU  mechanism  to

reduce  inequalities  and  promote  sustainable  economic  growth,  with  a  focus  on  supporting

and modernising SMEs;

 Bring in a European tax on the wealthy to fund essential investment for poverty reduction and

environmental and social transitions. Impose a windfall tax on excessive proﬁts in the energy

and war-related industries, such as banks and the arms sector. Introduce a progressive cloud

tax on digital platform revenues, covering expenditure by corporations and political parties on

social media;

1 1

 Make the ECB an instrument that provides direct ﬁnancing to the states to strengthen public

institutions  and  bodies  in  meeting  the  needs  of  public  rights  and  services  and  ecological

transformation. Create a European Fund for public services, ﬁnanced at 0% by the ECB, with

democratic  governance,  for  investment,  massive  recruitment  and  training,  particularly  in

transport (freight and passengers), health and education, research and for ﬁnancial advances

in social protection;

 Change the banking policy of the ECB: low interest rates (down to 0% or less) for bank loans

for company investments that reduce carbon emissions and create good jobs; high interest

rates, even penalty rates, for loans that cut jobs, relocate, increase polluting emissions (CO2,

etc.) or are dedicated to speculation;

 Approve  a  debt  restructuring  programme  that  includes  the  monetisation  of  public  debt

acquired by the ECB, with retrocession of interest in exchange for social conditionality so that

the additional ﬂows resulting from the restructuring are used to improve the social cohesion

and  welfare  indicators  of  the  population  and  to  promote  sustainable  development  policies.

Moreover, the ﬁnancing of public spending programmes and the creation of good jobs should

form part of the ECB’s objectives;

 Tax ﬁnancial transactions and combat tax evasion and fraud by drawing up an accurate list of

tax havens, including those within the EU, and introducing a withholding tax on the proﬁts of

multinationals and banks. We must put an end to tax havens within the European Union!

  Create a European Fund for social housing, public services and employment needs, ﬁnanced

by the ECB’s money creation, and lending to states, municipalities, cooperatives and non-proﬁt

institutions at zero or very low interest rates. The fund must be managed with transparency

and  guaranteed  through  the  involvement  of  civil  society,  especially  trade  unions,  women’s

associations, tenants’ associations and ecological movements.

1 2

1 3

Transforming labour

We  want  to  build  a  united  left  and  progressive  front  in  Europe  capable  of  changing  the  current 

power relations by empowering workers and trade unions to shape the future EU. We want a new 

green social contract that meets the challenges of the 21st century and aims to reduce inequalities. 

Together with left trade unionists, we have drawn up 16 demands that form a basis for common action.  

Our  political  goal  is  to  use  the  huge  increase  in  global  labour  productivity  to  improve  people’s 

lives by reducing working hours without loss of pay, and to redirect production towards social and 

environmental needs.

The  EU  must  address  the  cost-of-living  crisis  by  increasing  wages  and  pensions  above  the  rate 

of  inﬂation,  with  particular  emphasis  on  eliminating  inequalities.  The  EU  needs  to  increase  wages 

and close the gender pay gap. This requires strong trade unions. We support the universal right to 

organise,  to  bargain  collectively  and  to  take  industrial  action,  including  strikes,  at  European  level. 

Wage earners, workers and the working class must be empowered to become protagonists in building 

the new socially just and ecologically responsible Europe through the creation of new rights. Economic 

democracy is the key to enabling working people to intervene in what and how they produce. 

Together with the trade unions, we are ﬁghting for a just transition to human-centred digitalisation. 

We need to address the challenges of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in a socially just way. Workers have the 

right to be involved in deﬁning the social and environmental goals of companies and public services.  

Workers  in  the  platform  economy  must  be  identiﬁed  as  workers.  We  ﬁght  against  precarious 

work  and  for  the  right  of  every  worker  to  a  stable,  permanent  contract  and  a  full-time  job.  

The majority of workers in the care economy are women. The Party of the European Left  is committed 

to  ﬁghting,  together  with  the  trade  unions  and  the  feminist  movement,  for  socially  and  ﬁnancially 

decent work for women.

1 4

 Our proposals for immediate action:

 No  more  working  poor!  A  European  Basic  Income  Directive  that  obliges  Member  States  to

legally guarantee everyone a minimum income that covers the basic needs for a decent life

(food, housing, energy, access to culture, funds for emergencies, etc.);

 Approval  of  a  Guaranteed  Employment  Plan  in  the  European  Union,  which  would  focus  on

programmes for reforestation and environmental protection, housing renovation and energy

efficiency, promotion of care, training/employment for the unemployed and social economy

initiatives that create jobs. It would be ﬁnanced by the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)

and conditionality would be linked only to the creation of quality public jobs;

 An EU legal framework for a just transition in the world of work through the anticipation and

management of change based on collective bargaining and trade union involvement;

 An EU regulation guaranteeing the legal right to permanent contracts and full-time work and

banning unpaid internships. Social rights and labour rights must be fully enforced in platform

work and telework;

 Migrant workers should be welcomed on equal terms and working conditions;

 The EU must establish a Social Progress Protocol in primary law, giving priority to workers’ and

social rights over the freedom of the single market;

 Amend the Working Time Directive with the aim of reducing working hours for the same wage.

1 5

Empowering Democracy in AI and Innovation

We welcome the European Parliament’s attempt to regulate the use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and 

support the ban on biometric surveillance, emotion recognition and predictive policing by AI systems. 

However, the EP’s draft focuses on market-based regulation and thus misses the essential issue: the 

need for transparency and accountability (democratic and societal control) of technological innova-

tion with regard to its social and environmental impacts.

Our proposalS:

 Effective regulation of AI with the humans-in-control principle must be incorporated into EU

law;

 Any regulation of AI by the EU must take into account the impact of AI on the world of work

and social systems, and exclude possible discriminatory uses of AI or racially-biased systems;

 The introduction of AI in high-risk areas and mega-data transactions must be identiﬁed and

prohibited;

 The use of AI in weapons systems must be prohibited;

 The controlled introduction of digital technology in education must respect and enhance the

work and status of teachers, avoid exacerbating social inequalities, and limit negative impacts

on the environment;

 Public and private services are rapidly being digitalised. The whole population cannot keep

up with this rapid development and there is a risk of digital exclusion. The elderly, people with

disabilities and all those in need must be guaranteed adequate user support and access to the

necessary equipment to prevent exclusion.

1 6

1 7

The feminist perspective. Women’s rights 

are human rights.

The Party of the European Left considers feminism fundamental to building a Europe of peace, self-

determination,  freedom,  and  equality,  free  from  violence  against  women.  In  war,  we  see  the  most 

extreme expression of patriarchal violence. The feminist ideal is therefore the logical antithesis to any 

kind of militarism and armament.

Left feminism offers a profound critique of capitalist and patriarchal society by proposing an alternative 

to the economy based on the exploitation of human beings and nature, namely an economy based 

on life. The European Left demands equal opportunities for women. It wants to put an end to the 

inequality that women suffer in Europe simply because they are working women.

We denounce the persistent gender pay and pension gap and ﬁght for the recognition and redistribution 

of care work, which still falls almost exclusively on women’s shoulders. We demand the promotion 

of public care systems. We oppose all forms of oppression based on class, gender, ethnicity, colour, 

gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, disability and age. It is this emancipatory perspective 

that distinguishes it from the liberal feminism currently dominant in the European institutions.

The European Left defends the right of women to make autonomous decisions about motherhood 

and  their  bodies.  It  demands  that  the  right  to  universally  accessible  contraceptive  services  and 

safe  abortion  be  guaranteed  by  the  European  Treaties  throughout  Europe.  Together  with  feminist 

movements, we ﬁght against the sexist violence and machismo that women suffer throughout their 

lives and demand a comprehensive legal and political framework to deal with gender-based violence 

in all its forms.

The  Party  of  the  European  Left  wants  to  make  a  feminist  perspective  the  criterion  for  the  EU’s 

economic, environmental and social policies, as well as in health, education and culture.

1 8

1 9

Our proposals for immediate action include demanding:

 EU accession to the Istanbul Convention on preventing and combating violence against women

and domestic violence; there is a need for a comprehensive EU policy framework to eliminate

all gender-based violence in all European countries;

 Recognition  of  the  term  ‘femicide’  in  EU  and  Member  State  legislation  and  adoption  of  a

common deﬁnition of rape in the EU;

 Guaranteed decent work for women - targeted policies to ensure equal opportunities for men

and women;

 Immediate transposition of the EU Equal Pay Directive into national law in all Member States;

 Increased and guaranteed pensions for women;

 An  EU  Directive  requiring  EU  Member  States  to  provide  access  to  antenatal  and  maternal

health services, voluntary family planning and free, safe and legal abortion.

For an end to discrimination and for the full inclusion of 
LGBTQIA+ people:

 We campaign for the fundamental rights to marriage and parenthood for all couples, and to

ensure that the rights of same-sex couples and their children are recognised across the EU;

 We advocate for the depathologisation of trans identities and gender self-determination, as

well  as  a  guarantee  of  recognition  of  these  identities  and  access  to  treatment  for  the  free

development of these identities throughout the EU;

 Legal recognition of LGBTQIA+ identities must be included as a ground for asylum;

 Anti-discrimination laws need to be promoted and hate speech deﬁned in order to be effectively 

addressed.

2 0

Co-development, not colonial domination and 

hegemony

Today’s globalised world shows that national antagonisms and European isolationism are illusions. 

The  Covid-19  pandemic,  with  6  million  deaths  worldwide,  has  highlighted  the  importance  of 

international action in the face of today’s crises. The European Left, together with governments of 

the Global South, trade unions, NGOs and church organisations, has called for global cooperation 

in  the  ﬁght  against p andemics  and f or  vaccines t o  be d eclared  a  common g ood  of h umanity.  

The European Union must deﬁne its place in the emerging multipolar world and promote the non-

use of force in international relations. It must promote cooperation between sovereign states based 

on equality and the renunciation of hegemony. We want the EU to work for the democratisation of 

international institutions: the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and, above all, the United 

Nations, which must be re-founded in order to abandon the current model, which is a response to 

the Cold War of the 21st century, and make way for a multilateral model which, among other things, 

extends the powers of the General Assembly to the beneﬁt of the majority of states, allows for greater 

participation by civil society and strengthens the agencies of the UN by enhancing the powers of the 

General Assembly in the interest of the majority of states. EU trade policy must reject the neoliberal 

system of free trade agreements and the privatisation of services.

We call on the EU to break with its neocolonial style of domination and relaunch its trade and ﬁnancial 

relations  with  the  Global  South  on  a  new  basis;  speciﬁcally,  we  propose  that  relations  with  Latin 

America abandon the neoliberal logic and obscurantism of FTAs in order to establish a cooperation 

among equals that is transparent, sustainable and, above all, of mutual beneﬁt. We want the EU to 

oppose the misuse of the international ﬁnancial system as a weapon in the new Cold War and instead 

uphold multilateralism in the EU’s economic and trade relations, supporting the de-dollarisation of 

international  trade  and  the  creation  of  a  common  world  currency  to  put  an  end  to  the  unilateral 

domination of the US dollar and a transformation of the IMF.

2 1

Fortress Europe has been waging a war against migrants and refugees for decades, causing violence, 

suffering and torture, with thousands of victims in the Mediterranean and along the Balkan route, and 

thousands of deportations. We want to stop Frontex, the externalisation of borders, the relocation of 

detention centres to non-EU countries, the funding of bloodthirsty regimes, and the administrative 

detention of those deemed unﬁt to remain in the EU. The New Pact on Migration and Asylum, signed 

on 20 December 2023, must be cancelled because it condemns refugees to detention and, in most 

cases, deportation. We are working for a Europe without cages and barbed wire, one that acts not as 

a wall but as a bridge to other continents and the people who live there.

We call on the EU to base its international policy exclusively on the UN Charter and UN resolutions 

instead of building up military capacities for worldwide interventions following NATO’s instructions 

and resolutions.

The EU’s migration policy must respect international law. We support the creation of safe, legal and 

regular migration channels and improved protection, rights and assistance for migrants and asylum 

seekers. If the EU wants to reduce the number of refugees and migrants then it needs to promote 

peace, stability and sustainable development in the Middle East, sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia 

instead of participating in military interventions, fuelling civil wars and exploiting natural resources.

2 2

Our proposals for immediate action:

	We  call  for  a  break  with  ‘Fortress  Europe’  –  we  stand  for  legal  and  safe  migration  routes 

and  oppose  the  policy  of  illegal  pushbacks.  The  EU  must  develop  and  implement  a  truly 

European  migration  and  asylum  policy,  based  on  co-responsibility  and  obligatory  solidarity 

between all Member States. A migration policy deﬁned by the creation of safe, legal passages, 

in order to combat the extensive trafficking in human beings and stop human losses in the 

Mediterranean.  An  asylum  policy  that  respects  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights 

and  the  Geneva  Convention  on  the  Status  of  Refugees.  We  demand  the  abrogation  of  all 

agreements and declarations on migration and refugees that violate these fundamental rights, 

including agreements on the externalisation of European borders, and their replacement with a 

common reception system in the European Union based on criteria of inter-territorial solidarity 

and respect for the rights of migrants and refugees;

	We  call  for  a  Council  Directive  on  implementing  the  principle  of  equal  treatment  between 

persons irrespective of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation;

	We demand the abolition of the Dublin Agreement, and the dissolution of Frontex;

	We  demand  the  cancellation  of  the  EU’s  Free  Trade  Agreements  (FTAs)  with  the  countries 

of the Global South and their replacement with new international agreements, trade control 

and  investment  treaties  for  co-development  and  public  goods  that  respect  industrial  and 

agricultural sovereignty, fair trade and social and environmental development, promoting the 

consumption of locally produced goods and short distribution channels. This must be done in 

an independent manner, without subordinating these relations to the geopolitical interests of 

the USA and NATO;

	We call on EU Member States to cancel the Covid debt of countries in the Global South. A 

general public audit of illegitimate, coerced debt should be introduced;

	A European Fund for ecological and social co-development, ﬁnanced by the ECB, must be set 

up to establish new relations with the countries of the South. Workers’ representatives from 

the countries concerned must be able to participate;

	We call on the EU to commit to an immediate and massive multiannual issue of SDRs (Special 

Drawing Rights) for the ecological transition and the response to the social crisis, allocated 

according to the needs of each country, and to an overhaul of voting rights within the IMF, 

based both on a country’s GDP and on the weight of its population in the world;

2 3

	The  world  must  recognise  the  danger  threatening  the  Armenian  people.  We  demand  the 

cancellation of the gas contract between the EU and Azerbaijan. The energy argument must 

not be an argument against the basic human rights of the Armenian people;

	In line with the annual vote of the UN General Assembly for the past 30 years, we call on the 

EU  to  take  action  against  the  USA’s  economic,  ﬁnancial,  and  trade  embargo  against  Cuba, 

and its extraterritorial application, as well as its immediate removal from the list of countries 

promoting terrorism;

	The EU must call on the repressive regime of Turkey to stop its aggression against the Kurdish 

people. It should condemn Morocco’s occupation of Western Sahara, its attacks and human 

rights violations against the Saharawi people and its military aggressions against the territories 

liberated  by  the  Polisario  Front  and  the  Saharawi  refugee  camps  in  Tindouf,  and  support  a 

referendum on self-determination for the Saharawi people in line with UN resolutions;

	The Euro-Turkish negotiations for the revision of the Customs Union must be used as a means 

of  placing  pressure  on  Turkey  for  a  joint  appeal  on  the  part  of  Greece  and  Turkey  to  the 

International Court of Justice on issues of the continental shelf and the EEZ.

2 4

Let’s dare to do democracy!

We are in favour of a thorough public debate on the future of the EU, involving national parliaments, 

the European Parliament and civil society. The recent ‘Conference on the Future of Europe’ concluded 

its work with a call for a revision of the European Treaty in the direction of democratic participation, 

transparency, accountability and social cohesion.

We are ﬁghting for a new EU that prioritises an ecologically sustainable economy, employment, and the 

welfare state, overcoming economic and social disparities between Europe’s regions and advocating 

equality between men and women – instead of the single market and so-called ‘monetary stability’.

We continue our struggle to overcome the crisis of the EU and to build a truly democratic union of 

the  European  people.  Although  we  are  ﬁghting  for  reforms  within  the  legal  framework  of  the  EU, 

we  believe  that  it  is  the  current  EU  treaties  that  stand  in  the  way  of  radical  social  and  ecological 

transformation and the effective and democratic sovereignty of the people. We therefore call for an 

independent, solidarity-based, participatory and democratic re-founding of the EU.

The  rule  of  law,  women’s  rights  and  democracy  are  values  that  must  be  applied  and  enforced 

throughout  the  EU.  We  likewise  defend  the  right  of  the  parliaments  and  governments  of  Member 

States to reject anti-social, neoliberal measures when they are imposed.

The new EU must respect the sovereign self-determination of the European peoples, who cooperate 

with each other as equals. Policy areas of shared competence must be democratised, with the directly-

elected European Parliament and the national parliaments playing the central role. We also recognize 

the existence and the rights of peoples without states.

Europe is more than the EU. European security and cooperation require the strengthening of pan-

european institutions such as the Council of Europe and the OSCE.

The  EU  has  set  clear  criteria  for  its  enlargement  policy,  which  must  not  be  watered  down:  States 

can  only  become  members  of  the  EU  if  they  respect  human  rights,  the  rule  of  law  and  the  social 

and political rights of their populations, including minorities. Enlargement must not be an instrument 

2 5

for deepening rifts within Europe and increasing military tensions. It must not assign the accession 

countries the role of suppliers of cheap raw materials, agricultural products, and cheap labour as it 

is doing already now. This is good neither for the working people of the accession countries nor for 

those of Member States. In contrast, it must focus on safeguarding democracy and the rule of law and 

boosting social cohesion in candidate and Member States.

We believe that the right of universal suffrage can enable immigrants to actively participate in the 

commons, and the right to vote from 16 years of age would be a good ﬁrst step towards strengthening 

democracy and participation.

Our positions:

	The new treaties must deﬁne anti-fascist and anti-Nazi values as the foundations of the Union;

	The directly-elected European Parliament must have the right to initiate legislation, to propose 

laws,  to  elect  the  European  Commission,  to  propose  and  decide  on  the  EU  budget  and  to 

control the activities of the European Central Bank;

	While the European Parliament has no competence in Common Foreign and Security Policy, 

we reject the abolition of the unanimity principle in the European Council in these matters;

	We  support  the  aspirations  of  the  Irish  people  to  reunite  their  nation  divided  by  British 

colonialism.

2 6

 
 
Our party has the ambition to be an instrument for a new unity of 

the Left in Europe across party lines, working for the convergence 

and common action of all progressive and green forces. 

We offer our election manifesto for discussion and debate to all those 

who  want  to  work  for  a  democratic,  just,  feminist  and  ecological 

Europe based on a new paradigm of sustainable development.

Vote for the member, observer and partner parties of the EL!

2 7

2 8

