2024

EPP
Manifesto

Our Europe, a safe
and good home for
the people

Our Europe, a safe and good home for the people 

Europe is our home. As the EPP, we have built a Europe where people’s dignity, security and 
freedom  always  come  first.  We,  as  Europeans,  are  more  than  the  sum  of  our  national 
identities. Our history, our heritage, our Judeo-Christian roots and our cultural diversity define 
us. United in diversity is a unique strength that has made peace and prosperity possible for 
most Europeans. 

Faced  with  a  complex  world,  some  believe  that  everyone  should  dream  of  being  a  global 
citizen without roots. Others want to close all doors and retreat into national egoism. We do 
not agree! We are proud of our roots and confident about the future. We do not tell citizens 
what to believe or what to fear, but we listen to them, respect them and deliver for them. We 
are bridge-builders. The EPP invented our social market economy, which balances economic 
freedom with social responsibility. The EPP stands for a strong democracy based on the rule 
of law, which means that it is the citizens who really decide. The EPP fights for a strong Europe 
that protects its people.  

We believe in our European way of life. Freedom is key, but freedom without security is an 
empty word. Our people expect a Europe that makes them feel safe in every facet of their 
lives. Our people want secure jobs that ensure a good life and support growing families. Our 
people expect Europe to champion a life with freedom, justice and democracy.  

We stand for a strong Europe that speaks with one voice on democracy, the rule of law and 
freedom. A Europe that confidently stands up to autocrats and stands by those who fight for 
our European way of life, as Ukrainians are doing against Putin’s aggression. A Europe that 
protects its borders and tackles illegal migration. 

We stand for a competitive Europe that boosts its economy and creates quality jobs while 
building a good economic future for everyone. We believe in European leadership in climate 
and environmental protection not only to safeguard our planet but also to promote economic 
prosperity and food security with less bureaucracy while boosting innovation and a future-
oriented energy union. We want Europe to shape and lead the future by investing in state-of-
the-art infrastructure, innovation and digital technologies. We want an open Europe that also 
protects  its  own  interests.  We  want  to  provide  our  citizens  and  companies  with  access  to 
global  markets  by  concluding  smart,  reciprocity-based  trade  agreements  with  like-minded 
partners.  

We stand for a citizens-oriented Europe that supports families, creates opportunities for all, 
promotes equality between women and men and fosters solidarity between generations. A 
Europe that protects and cares for the most vulnerable in our society, online and offline. A 
Europe that ensures every technological innovation puts people first. A Europe that turns brain 
drain into brain gain. A Europe that invests in health research, guarantees high health and care 
standards and fights diseases.  

We stand for a democratic Europe where the people decide, a Europe that upholds its core 
values, within and beyond its borders. A Europe that guarantees citizens are equal before the 
law and regains the trust of those who feel unheard or left behind. 

Europe holds all the right cards to shape the future. As the EPP has done over the past decades, 
we  will  keep  Europe  together,  we  will  defend  the  European  way  of  life  based  on  freedom, 
pluralism,  subsidiarity,  solidarity,  democracy  and  the  rule  of  law  and  we  will  promote 

sustainable  economic  growth  and  development.  With  the  EPP  in  Europe’s  driving  seat, 
Europeans will be stronger and safer. 

I. 

Our Europe protects its citizens  

There is no freedom without security. We take citizens’ safety concerns very seriously, but 
instead of dividing society we focus on solutions. Only our responsible political approach can 
truly protect our citizens. 

1.1 Our Europe stands with Ukraine 

The  EPP  has  demonstrated  unwavering  support  for  Ukraine  since  the  very  beginning  of 
Russia’s full-scale war of aggression. Ukraine defends not only its own freedom, sovereignty 
and territorial integrity but also our shared European values. The EPP will remain a leader in 
mobilising much-needed EU support and assistance until Ukraine’s decisive victory.  

It is of paramount importance that the European Union remains committed and united in its 
support of Ukraine. Europe must, in cooperation with its allies, find ways to amplify its support 
to Ukraine. This includes political, economic, humanitarian and military aid, for as long as it 
takes. Europe will stand united with Ukraine against Putin. Ukraine must win the war. This 
requires certainty regarding the long-term financing of Ukraine for its economic and social 
recovery,  modernisation  and  reconstruction.  We  have  delivered  in  an  unprecedented  way 
financial support and military capabilities. We have protected millions of Ukrainian refugees. 
We have created a lifeline to the Ukrainian economy by supporting its exports to the world. 
We have developed a biting EU sanctions regime against Russia and are effectively addressing 
sanctions circumvention while further strengthening their scope where and when necessary. 
The EU needs to continue and step up its support. The war in Ukraine is directly linked to 
European security. Ukraine should become a member of the EU and NATO as soon as it fulfils 
all criteria. The EU has to be ready to enlarge. 

1.2 Our Europe must protect itself  

Russia’s illegal war of aggression against Ukraine, the weaponisation of energy and food and 
irresponsible nuclear threats, combined with growing tensions in the South China Sea and the 
Taiwan Strait, are a wake-up call for Europe. The pace of geopolitical change is dramatic and 
the world has become a more dangerous place. In this new environment, Europeans need to 
protect  Europe.  The  EPP  will  always  stand  with  an  enlarged  NATO  and  fully  support  the 
strengthening of our alliance, including through Sweden’s accession. Every European effort in 
the field of defence has to be embedded and coherent with NATO. However, our trans-Atlantic 
allies  will  stand  with  us  only  if  we  are  also  willing  to  do  our  part  autonomously.  A  strong 
alliance requires burden sharing. We also must be ready for any changes in our trans-Atlantic 
partnership and a scenario in which we do not have the support of the United States to ensure 
our  European  sovereignty  for  comprehensive  security.  This  also  includes  close  cooperation 
with our European partners, such as the United Kingdom and Norway. Our citizens understand 
that  Europe  needs  to  do  more  in  a  world  in  turmoil.  The  EPP  is  the  only  party  that  has 
consistently shown its willingness to promote a strong defence posture in Europe to ensure 

 
 
 
both  deterrence  and  defence.  We  are  the  political  force  that  stands  for  a  Europe  that  can 
defend itself, in line with the principle of strategic autonomy, and support those who fight for 
Europe and its values. This shall not prejudice the specific neutral character of the security 
and defence policy of certain Member States. 

We need to establish three steps for European defence. First, we must ramp up our defence 
industrial base through more investments. The EPP has already championed initiatives of joint 
military  procurement,  such  as  the  European  Defence  Industry  Reinforcement  through 
common  Procurement  Act  (EDIRPA)  and  European  Defence  Industrial  Development 
Programme (EDIDP). However, we need to go further. Our focus must be on Defence Tech 2.0, 
combining the defence industry and the most advanced computer technologies. We want the 
next  long  term  budget  (MFF)  to  provide  the  resources  to  innovate  and  meet  our  military 
needs.  Ultimately,  we  should  create  a  Single  Market  for  Defence.  The  EU  should  use  the 
European Defence Agency (EDA) to provide financial support mainly to defence companies to 
standardise  the  systems  they  produce  and  encourage  more  joint  defence  procurement 
projects in Europe, as well as research of artificial intelligence (AI) for dual purposes (civilian 
and  military).  Member  States  should  consider  giving  priority  to  purchases  of  military 
equipment  made  in  Europe  to  enhance  the  EU’s  strategic  autonomy  and  stand  up  to 
aggressors such as Putin. We will develop common European weapons programmes under 
the EDA supervision in liaison with the Member States. Moreover, the EU needs common rules 
for arms exports. 

Second,  we  must  work  better  together  by  utilising  all  available  options  in  the  EU  Treaties 
including PESCO and its flagship projects, such as the project on military mobility that supports 
crucial cross-border military transport. We also need to establish a Commissioner for Security 
and  Defence,  who  will  better  coordinate  defence  issues  within  the  framework  of  EU 
competences and promote cooperation, as well as a Defence Council with defence ministers 
of  Member  States.  We  should  also  envisage  the  establishment  of  a  dedicated  EU  defence 
budget within the MFF with enough resources to face the challenges of today and tomorrow.  

Finally,  our  long-term  goal  is  to  develop  a  true  European  Defence  Union  with  integrated 
European  forces  in  the  land,  sea,  cyber  and  air.  These  forces  should  complement  national 
militaries,  aligned  with  NATO's  new  force  model,  with  a  rapid  deployment  capacity  of  a 
permanent and immediately available force. We want to create a European Fund for External 
Military Intervention enabling Member States that do not wish to mobilise their armed forces 
for  an  EU  external  military  operation  to  make  a  financial  contribution  to  the  collective 
European defence. This European fund would enable the full costs of operations to be taken 
into account and shared among Member States. Our collective action should also focus, in 
particular, on areas such as cyber defence and security of space. The EU, together with willing 
Member States, must tackle future European defence projects in close cooperation with our 
trans-Atlantic  partners,  including  a  missile  defence  shield,  a  European  DARPA,  a  European 
Cyber  brigade,  a  European  nuclear  shield  and  increased  production  capacities  for  defence 
goods. We must also strengthen European cooperation of intelligence services. 

1.3 Our Europe speaks with one voice in the world  

In the new geopolitical environment, Europe can represent its interests in the world only if it 
speaks with one voice. Europe is strong when it is able to respond quickly and work with like-

 
 
 
 
minded countries. Our ability to react to global events will determine our success. Europe has 
to  become  ready  to  act  in  foreign  policy.  We  therefore  advocate  moving  away  from  the 
unanimity principle in the field of EU sanctions against totalitarian regimes around the world 
and towards the Single Market for Defence. We will develop a stronger European diplomatic 
corps through the European External Action Service (EEAS). But Europe also needs qualified 
personnel. The EPP calls for the replacement of the High Representative with an EU foreign 
minister,  as  Vice-President  of  the  European  Commission,  and  for  the  appointment  of  a 
European Security Council comprised of the leaders of EU Member States and other European 
countries (including at least the UK, Norway and Iceland). This Minister will closely cooperate 
with all national EU colleagues on our common interests as well as intensively coordinate with 
the other European countries, in particular the UK, Norway and Iceland. The EU has to react 
quickly to international crises and coherently follow through on its foreign-policy decisions, 
for example making sure that sanctions are truly and consistently implemented. In the coming 
years, the EU will continue to face enormous challenges on the global stage, as Russia’s war 
of aggression in Ukraine,  conflicts in the Middle East and the recent instability caused by the 
Iranian regime have already shown. The EU also needs a long-term strategy towards other key, 
strategic  areas  including  China  and  Taiwan,  Russia  and  Belarus,  Africa,  Latin  America,  the 
Mediterranean region and the Middle East. In short, we need to determine the interests of 
Europe  in  order  to  have  a  coherent  foreign  policy  in  which  all  Member  States  must  be 
considered and their interests protected. Moreover, we need to engage with the new regional 
powers that are becoming increasingly important players on the global stage. 

The EPP remains fully committed to supporting the negotiation process for a just, sustainable 
and viable solution to the benefit of all the people of Cyprus, without the presence of foreign 
troops and the anachronistic system of guarantees and intervention rights of any foreign state. 
The EU should send a strong message of solidarity to Cyprus by assuming a more active role 
in  trying  to  overcome  the  deadlock  and  resume  the  negotiations  to  end  the  50-year-long 
occupation of Cyprus by Turkey and reunify the island on the basis of a bizonal bicommunal 
federation, with political equality, in line with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions, EU 
principles  and  the  acquis.  The  unacceptable  partitionist  rhetoric  of  Turkey  for  a  two-state 
solution will never be accepted by Europe and the international community. 

1.4 Our Europe protects its borders against illegal migration 

As  the  EPP,  we  are  determined  to  guarantee  control  over  migration  and  we  do  so  in 
accordance with international law and in respect of fundamental rights. The guiding principles 
of our migration policy are humanity and order. We seek a halt to uncontrolled migration so 
that  Europe’s  capacity  to  integrate  is  not  overwhelmed.  European  Member  States,  not 
smugglers,  must  decide  who  enters  Europe.  Important  first  steps  have  been  taken  by  the 
expansion of Frontex to 10,000 staff in recent years, the financing of an electronic and physical 
infrastructure to protect the EU’s external borders, the new Migration and Asylum Pact at the 
end of 2023 and the closer cooperation with third countries, as is the case with Tunisia.  

Despite a complete refusal by the extreme right to engage constructively in reducing migration 
and the reluctance of the left to reduce illegal migration, our priorities are clear. To begin with, 
we  must  ensure  stronger  external  borders,  with  better  and  more  rigorous  screening  of 
irregular  arrivals.  Entry  at  the  EU’s  external  borders  must  be  electronically  monitored  in  a 

 
 
comprehensive  way.  This  includes  structural  and  technical  border  protection  wherever 
necessary.  We  need  as  soon  as  possible  an  effective  external  border  protection  in  place; 
otherwise  we  cannot  exclude  controls  at  internal  borders.  It  is  crucial  to  reinforce  every 
measure against human smugglers and traffickers, break their business model and end their 
impunity. We need increased burden sharing in times of crisis, better-shared responsibilities 
and strong protection of human rights, with special attention to vulnerable people.  

We want to transform Frontex into a real European border and coast guard. We will triple 
Frontex  staff  to  30,000,  equip  it  with  implementing  powers  as  well  as  a  higher  budget  to 
purchase modern equipment and enhance its capabilities. We want to guarantee that Frontex 
officers, together with their national counterparts, have the means to better protect the EU’s 
external borders.  

The mandate of Frontex should focus on three priorities: preventing illegal immigration into 
the EU, helping Member States to secure the EU’s external borders and increasing the return 
of  illegal  migrants  to  their  countries.  We  will  actively  pursue  an  agreement  on  common 
standards  for  monitoring  our  external  borders  and  the  funding  that  is  necessary  for  the 
implementation of these standards.  

We also advocate a fundamental change in European asylum law. We are committed to the 
fundamental right to asylum, but the EU, together with its Member States, must have the right 
to decide to whom and where is it granted. We will conclude agreements with third countries 
to ensure that asylum seekers can also be granted protection in a civilised and safe way. We 
want to implement the concept of safe third countries. Anyone applying for asylum in the EU 
could also be transferred to a safe third country and undergo the asylum process there. In the 
case of a positive outcome, the safe third country will grant protection to the applicant on-
site. A comprehensive contractual agreement will be established with the safe third country. 
The criteria for safe third countries shall be in line with the core obligations of the Geneva 
Refugee Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights. Both conventions do not 
include  the  right  to  freely  choose  the  country  of  protection.  Following  the  successful 
implementation of the third country concept, we propose to admit into the EU a quota of 
people in need of protection through annual humanitarian quotas of vulnerable individuals. 
This allows us to address both security and integration requirements in the selection process 
and effectively refuse entry to irregular migrants at our external borders.  

We are committed to upholding the fundamental right to asylum while fighting the abuse of 
national  asylum  procedures.  Therefore,  all  relevant  EU  policies,  instruments  and  tools, 
including new trade agreements, development aid and visa policies, should depend on the 
cooperation  of  third  countries  in  the  field  of  migration,  more  specifically  on  returns  and 
readmission  of  their  nationals.  Nevertheless,  we  would  like  to  stress  that,  considering  the 
current  situation  in  Ukraine,  we  want  to  refrain  from  returning  refugees  to  Ukraine  at  this 
point. Tackling the migration problem at its core requires a new pact with African countries, 
supported  by  a  European  investment  plan  for  Africa,  to  address  more  effectively  the  root 
causes of migration, foster economic prosperity and social development and prevent the brain 
drain of the younger generation for the benefit of all African people. 

Labour  migration  has  a  significant  territorial  impact  and  brings  both  opportunities  and 
challenges to ageing and demographically declining societies. It is up to the Member States to 

deal with legal migration, determine how it best fits their national interests and  facilitate legal 
migrants’ inclusion and integration into society.  

We need full Schengen admission for Bulgaria and Romania, lifting not just air and sea controls 
but  also  land  border  controls  as  soon  as  possible.  We  need  to  repair  the  currently 
dysfunctional Schengen Area, particularly by further strengthening the EU’s external border 
protection  and  by  preventing  illegal  migration  to  Europe  in  order  to  realise  a  secure  and 
completed Schengen Area without internal border controls. 

The instrumentalisation of illegal migration is a hybrid war strategy that must be stopped and 
identified as a threat to national and European security. Member States must have the option 
to  temporarily  suspend  processing  asylum  applications  in  the  case  of  instrumentalised 
migration. We will not allow anyone to blackmail Europe.  

1.5 Our Europe is determined to fight terrorism and organised crime  

We  will  leave  no  room  for  terrorism  and  organised  crime  in  Europe.  However,  national 
solutions alone cannot end international crime; we need European solutions and enhanced 
information  exchange  between  Member  States.  In  Europe  alone,  international  criminal 
organisations earn some €139 billion a year while Europol estimates that, within the EU, only 
about 2% of criminal proceeds are frozen and 1% are confiscated. Human trafficking increased 
by  10%  between  2020  and  2021,  with  over  7,155  victims  recorded  while  the  number  of 
suspected traffickers rose by 12.5%. Drug trafficking is a major security threat to the EU as, 
according  to  the  European  Commission,  nearly  70%  of  drug  seizures  are  carried  out  by 
customs authorities at EU ports. Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to our citizens. 
Between 2018 and 2022, there were 332 completed, failed or foiled attacks in the EU. As the 
main goal of organised crime groups is financial gain, the most effective way to fight them is 
to  stop  their  financial  flows  through  strengthened  anti-money  laundering  and  counter-
terrorism financing rules. We will establish a reinforced illegal assets recovery system, with 
improved  means  of  confiscation  capabilities,  strengthened  cross-border  cooperation  and 
information-sharing  among  relevant  national,  regional,  local  and  EU  bodies.  Terrorism 
continues to pose a serious threat to our citizens. 

We will significantly expand Europol, equipping it with all legally available competences in the 
fight against terrorism and international crime and more than doubling its staff from 1,400 to 
3,000. We will ensure national databases are connected with those of international security 
authorities  to  facilitate  information  sharing  between  law  enforcement  agencies  and 
intelligence  services  of  EU  Member  States.  The  work  of  the  Joint  Investigation  Teams  in 
carrying  out  cross-border  criminal  investigations  will  be  strengthened  and  facilitated.  It  is 
essential to deepen cooperation with the US and Latin American countries in the fight against 
drug trafficking. We must update and develop EU strategies on cyber security and enhance 
the EU Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) to ensure our systems, data and infrastructure are 
safe from cyber-attacks. We will expand the scope of the European arrest warrant and push 
for  its  successful  application.  We  will improve  the  information  exchange  between  counter 
terrorism  authorities  and  Asylum  and  Migration  Services.  The  EPP  is  equally  committed  to 
combatting  the  spread  of  ideologies  running  counter  to  EU  values  such  as  human  rights, 
freedom  and  democracy.  Hate  speech,  disinformation,  Putin’s  authoritarian  terrorist 

 
propaganda,  anti-Semitism  and  radical  Islamism  spread  division  and  intolerance  in  our 
societies. We reject and combat such extremism and violent radicalism in all forms.   

The  EPP  is  committed  to  preserving  a  peaceful  coexistence  in  European  countries  and 
societies. It is therefore not acceptable, by any means, not the least personal or electoral, to 
shield terrorism against the judiciary. Civil peace in Europe is based on compliance with the 
law  and  respect  for  the  rights  of  everyone.  We  have  a  bitter  memory  of  the  deep  sorrow 
caused by nationalism, radicalism and populism. 

1.6 Our Europe stops violence against women  

We want women to live without fear of any form of violence. The fight against organised crime 
is also a fight for the rights of oppressed women. Human trafficking affects between 70,000 
and 140,000 people every year in Europe, 84% of whom are forced into prostitution. We want 
1,000 officers to be deployed in a Europol special unit to combat prostitution and trafficking 
of women and girls. Forced marriage, female genital mutilation and any other form of violence 
against women under religious or cultural pretext must not be tolerated. Figures on violence 
against women in daily life are alarming: one in two women has experienced a form of sexual 
harassment. Domestic violence is too often a daily reality. On average, two women in the EU 
are killed by a partner or family member every day. Only a third of cases of physical or sexual 
abuse within families is reported to the police. The EU is taking decisive steps towards ending 
violence  against  women.  We  led  negotiations  to  criminalise  violence  against  women 
everywhere  in  Europe.  This  means  that  EU  Member  States  are  compelled  to  punish 
perpetrators of violence against women, including cyber violence. The Istanbul Convention on 
preventing  and  combatting  violence  against  women  and  domestic  violence  must  be  fully 
implemented  throughout  the  EU.  Violence  against  women  in  the  digital  space  must  be 
combatted  vigorously  and  the  issue  must  be  raised  at  all  political  levels  to  swiftly  act  to 
support victims, their needs and their security. Enabling and empowering women is crucial 
and, to do so, education is key. No woman should be afraid of walking freely on the streets or 
fear retaliation from a partner or endure any form of abuse in her private or professional life.  

1.7 Our Europe protects its citizens online and offline  

The COVID-19 pandemic taught us some important lessons about Europe’s ability to manage 
unexpected crises and clearly demonstrated that, when we are united, we are stronger. It also 
taught  us  that  we  need  a  comprehensive  EU-level  approach  to  preparedness  and  crisis 
response.  We  want  to  create  a  Preparedness  Union  through  increased  cooperation,  peer 
learning and coordination, ensuring the EU and its Member States will be better prepared for 
increasingly complex, cross-border and multi-faceted crises that often occur simultaneously. 
We want to create a Civil Protection Union force linked to strategic reserves of food, water, 
medicines and medical equipment, in a spirit of solidarity, to support our Member States in 
times of crisis. Fires that destroy our forests and threaten our citizens are ever more intense. 
We  also  want  to  create  an  operational  European  Firefighters’  force  to  be  swiftly  activated 
whenever Member State are in need. 

Online threats are on the rise. We must fight misinformation and disinformation that aim to 
manipulate  Europeans.  We  will  not  look  the  other  way  as  our  enemies  increasingly  try  to 

 
 
weaken our resilience. The share of cyber-attacks targeting EU countries has risen significantly 
during  the  last  year.  Cybercrime  is  no  longer  a  footnote  in  crime  statistics.  The  economic 
impact  of  cybercrime  has  doubled  worldwide.  Only  an  integrated  European  approach  will 
make us safer again. We need a European cyber brigade with clear responsibilities for external 
and internal security.   

Children, among the most vulnerable groups in our society, are targets of criminals, both in 
the physical and in the digital world. Globally, one in three children indicates being bullied 
online. In 2020, 33% of girls and 20% of boys in Europe reported having experienced disturbing 
content online at least once a month. Over 60% of child abuse material worldwide is based in 
EU servers and much is produced. This is unacceptable. We need an action plan against child 
abuse, sexual exploitation, cyberbullying and cyber threats that may lead to kidnapping and 
other forms of violence. We need permanent and binding EU rules to prevent and combat 
child sexual abuse. We want to use all necessary instruments to protect children and to further 
strengthen the EU’s actions on the Rights of Children. We advocate the storage of IP addresses 
for the most serious criminal offences, especially in the fight against child abuse, in accordance 
with the requirements of the European Court of Justice and in respect of the fundamental 
right to data protection. Traces must also be secured at the digital crime scene. We also want 
to better protect our children from cyberbullying online. To this end, cyberbullying should be 
considered a criminal offence throughout Europe. 

We  support  the  updated  proposed  Directive  that  will  harmonise  criminal  offenses  of  child 
abuse across the EU. Investing in awareness raising is key. It must include children and young 
people, parents and caregivers, teachers, policymakers and the industry. We must all work 
together to prevent these heinous crimes. 

II. 

Our Europe believes in a social market economy 

The  social  market  economy  is  our  invention.  The  EPP’s  economic  model  has  brought 
prosperity, jobs and social peace to Europe over the past 75 years. In a changing economic 
world, Europe is coming under increasing pressure: Europe’s share of world GDP has fallen 
from 20% to 15% while China’s has risen from 7% to 19% over the last half century. In addition, 
out of the top 50 global firms, only 6 are European while 20 are from the US and 13 from 
China.  

We must make our economy fit for new challenges. In response to the COVID pandemic, we 
launched the NextGenerationEU, the largest stimulus package ever financed in Europe. Now 
the war in Ukraine, the heinous terrorist attacks of Hamas and the growing instability in the 
Red Sea put new strains on our growth perspectives. High inflation, energy prices and interest 
rates are important concerns for our citizens and the EPP will tackle them decisively. To do 
this,  we  need  a  policy  that  is  not  clouded  by  misguided  ideology  but  rather  rests  on  solid 
factual grounds and social responsibility. We must balance different interests in our economy, 
society and environment, recognising the challenges of the global economy, climate change 
and the changing demographic realities on our continent. This is possible only if we work with 
creative  researchers,  responsible  entrepreneurs  and  hard-working  employees.  It  requires 
uncomplicated access to the labour market. It requires civic participation and a thriving civil 
society. We are creating the right conditions for this without ideological lenses, but close to 
the people and for them.  We want to deliver a tax-friendly and business-supportive Europe 

 
where our productive sectors can compete and thrive, where our workers can obtain a good 
income  and  where  everyone  contributes  fairly  to  society.  This  is  the  core  of  our  economic 
policy. 

2.1 Our Europe boosts its economic performance and creates good jobs  

The EPP remains fully committed to the euro, for it deepens the single market and enhances 
unity. Economic prosperity, ambitious environmental protection and social peace can succeed 
in Europe only if our economy is also successful worldwide. This is why competitiveness is so 
crucial. It requires sustained economic performance, economic, social and political stability 
and sufficient freedom for entrepreneurs encouraged by a clear vision and long-term targets. 
It  also  requires  fair  and  good  working  conditions,  a  skilled  workforce,  excellent  innovative 
drive, an efficient, effective and accountable public administration at the service of its citizens 
and companies and fiscal policies that don´t impose additional burdens on them. At the same 
time, economic growth, competitiveness and the wish to create an attractive market need to 
also be reflected in European legislation and in concrete means and actions to fight tax evasion 
and  corruption.  We  have  to  refrain  from  tendencies  towards  over-regulation  without 
considering all three dimensions of sustainability – economic, ecologic and societal. 

Above all, Europe’s economic performance depends on a successful single market. Since the 
creation  of  the  single  market,  the  gross  domestic  product  per  capita  of  France,  Italy  and 
Germany has doubled while those of Poland and Lithuania have tripled since they joined. We 
want  to  lead  our  single  market  into  a  new  era  by  deepening  it  further  and,  especially,  by 
creating  a  genuine  digital  single  market.  At  the  same  time,  we  want  to  launch  a 
Competitiveness  Strategy  for  Europe  that  will  relaunch  the  spirit  of  entrepreneurship.  Our 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of our economic success and 
create over 100 million jobs. They need a level playing field across the EU to flourish.  We want 
to establish an EU Competitiveness Check on every new EU policy initiative and a European 
Advisory Competitiveness Body for our SMEs in particular.  

We  also  need  to  streamline  the  existing  regulations:  we  cannot  afford  to  force  people  to 
respect over 20 different legal acts on the same topic, such as in the case of the EU’s nature 
restoration law. We must always consider the real concerns of our citizens and businesses, not 
overwhelm  them.  Legislation  needs  to  be  user-friendly,  easy  to  understand  and 
implementable. Proposed laws that are not adopted by the end of a legislative period expire 
and may need to be reintroduced if necessary. We will reduce old bureaucracy by introducing 
a “one in, two out” principle with an overall objective of reducing the regulatory burden by a 
third  through  a  specific  action  plan.  To  this  end,  there  will  be  a  dedicated  European 
Commissioner  solely  responsible  for  SME  issues  and  cutting  red  tape.  To  facilitate  a  more 
efficient use of EU money for projects run by public authorities, the European Commission 
will promote joint European public procurement for common large-scale purchase of services 
or goods, when relevant, and with full respect for subsidiarity.  To facilitate our businesses, we 
want to make sure our legislative framework is always up to date. That is why we will introduce 
a “sunset clause” in EU legislation, where appropriate, so that a law ceases to exist unless 
further  action  is  required.  The  European  Commission  should  also  periodically  check  that 
existing pieces of legislation are not in contradiction with each other and are bringing a real 
European  added  value,  also  taking  into  account  legislation  adopted  across  several  policy 

 
 
domains.  Cross-sectoral  impacts  should  be  duly  assessed,  including  impacts  on  European 
security.  
We  welcome  the  appointment  of  the  special  SME  Envoy  and  support  the  Envoy’s  work  to 
monitor and accompany this process. In parallel, we will pursue a forward-looking European 
industrial  and  competition  policy  that  will  allow  the  creation  of  European  champions  to 
compete at global level. We want to challenge our economic competitors, such as China and 
the US, while defending strategically important European sectors against unfair practices. EU 
state aid policy must serve strategic sectors of the economy, based on the concept of major 
projects that are of common European interest. We also want to define a “Made in Europe 
2030”  strategic  plan  following  the  example  of  the  US.  The  EU  has  to  set  up  an  ambitious 
common industrial policy. During the past legislature, the EPP has been calling for an economic 
security strategy – which aims to minimise risks arising from certain economic flows in the 
context of increased geopolitical tensions and accelerate technological shifts. The EPP has also 
been at the forefront of urging the creation of new regulations aimed at safeguarding critical 
infrastructure. We want to further strengthen rules to make sure that strategic infrastructure 
such  as  ports,  telecommunication  and  energy  facilities  as  well  as  our  most  innovative 
companies  are  shielded  from  takeovers  by  third  countries,  notably  China.  Our  general 
approach towards China is to de-risk, not decouple. 

In  parallel,  we  must  also  increase  the  innovative  drive  of  our  economy  by  launching  an 
investment plan for European quality jobs, through which we want to invest in research and 
development, calling on Member States and the EU to reach a combined investment of 4% of 
GDP with a focus on scientific excellence bringing European added value. Public resources are 
not sufficient to meet investment needs within the EU. We need to succeed in mobilising more 
private savings. We will also launch a funding programme to significantly increase the number 
of women-led start-ups in areas of technological innovation such as AI. To promote a vibrant 
business environment and competitiveness, we want to improve the supply of fresh capital so 
that our companies, including SMEs, can continue to invest in the future by having access to 
deep and liquid capital markets. This requires the completion of a Capital Markets Union and 
a Banking union, the strengthening of the internal market for financial services as well as a 
sound and predictable fiscal policy that respects the Maastricht criteria. In addition, growth 
will be sustainable for us and future generations only through price stability. A sustainable 
economy also means that young people have a chance to effectively start their lives and build 
their careers. We will continue to combat youth unemployment, expand Erasmus+, especially 
to young people living in rural areas, and strengthen Discover EU in order to offer every young 
European  a  chance  to  travel  across  Europe  and  to  discover  our  European  and  national 
cultures. We believe all workers should benefit from Europe. That is why we want to ensure 
fair working conditions throughout the EU, including providing a safe and healthy workplace. 
We need to introduce more limit values for hazardous substances to establish a level playing 
field for businesses. We need to promote labour mobility with a European Social Security Pass 
by  strengthening  the  European  Labour  Authority  (ELA)  and  by  addressing  challenges 
concerning the posting of third-country nationals. The ELA has to take the next step to make 
a real impact for workers and businesses.  

 
 
 
2.2 Our Europe creates prosperity with and in the world   

We are the party of free and fair trade. While European interests have always to be at the core 
of our trade policy, exports are a crucial drive for our economy. More than 30 million jobs in 
the  EU  depend  on  external  trade  and  90%  of  global  economic  growth  is  expected  to  be 
generated outside Europe in the coming years. The EU’s trade deficit with China doubled in 
two years to a record €390 billion in 2022. We need a boost in trade policy, yet we often have 
to overcome the blockade of left-wing and right-wing populists. Our trade is about securing 
and expanding our own prosperity as well as safeguarding our strategic sectors and, at the 
same time, strengthening important economic partners. A value-led economic policy relies on 
trade.  We  need  a  new  smart  trade  policy  in  line  with  our  European  interests,  values  and 
standards based on the principle of reciprocity, especially to safeguard the interests of our 
farmers and fishers. Our economy will never prosper in a fortress. We want to trade with the 
entire world but also want to foster a special cooperation with like-minded partners in a Union 
of  Democracies  to  remain  competitive  vis-à-vis  dominant  competitors  such  as  China.  The 
western world must stand together politically and economically. No room should be left to 
dumping practices of third countries that undermine our efforts to reach strategic autonomy 
and higher social, environmental, safety or health standards. At the same time, we should 
intensify our trade relations with Latin America and the Indo-Pacific region with new smart 
and fair trade agreements. We also need to open a new, more intensive trade partnership 
with Africa based on public interests, skills development, strengthened prosperity, well-being, 
self-sufficiency and democracy as well as global dependencies on raw materials and energy. 
Our de-risking strategy must advance further.  

2.3 Our Europe needs energy 

It is not without reason that coal and steel were the foundations of European integration. Our 
Europe has always relied on shared energy. Today, with the consequences of the Russian war 
of  aggression  in  Ukraine  and  the  systemic  competition  with  China,  this  is  all  the  more 
important.  We  will  invest  more  in  the  development  of  electricity  and  gas  network 
interconnections between EU Member States in order to create a more united and efficient 
Energy Union. We will encourage investments to integrate further the European electricity 
and gas market to ensure lower prices for European citizens and our businesses. We want a 
European Energy Union that will lead us into a carbon-neutral and environmentally-friendly 
future. Member States decide on their specific energy mix. An open and neutral technology 
approach as guiding principle is a driver for innovation. We do not need a prohibitive Europe 
but instead an innovative Europe that places the economic, financial and social needs of its 
citizens at the centre of the future energy supply.  We also need to better align our energy 
transition  with  local  conditions.  For  example,  in  the  area  of  energy-efficient  home 
renovations, we will better align investments to help households cope with rising prices and 
renovation requirements in the next years. We need a strong EU financial arm to back up our 
net-zero industrial and green ambitions for Europe to be able to compete globally, and to make 
sure  this  economic  transformation  leaves  no  one  behind.  At  the  same  time,  Europe  needs 
more drive and energy when it comes to its future resources. For example, Europe will need 
60  times  more  lithium  for  a  sustainable  battery  supply  in  2050  than  it  does  today.  This 
necessitates  further  efforts  to  advance  battery  technology  and  battery  recycling  as  well  as 
efforts  to  reduce  the  overall  consumption  of  energy.  Resources  are  increasingly  pivotal  in 

 
economic  competition  since,  without  them,  innovation  is  impossible.  Global  technological 
leadership in the field of e-mobility will not succeed without rare earth elements from Africa, 
Latin America and Asia. We will promote a common European resource strategy for future 
innovations,  identifying  the  existing  resources  worldwide  and  using  them  in  Europe  while 
promoting  diversification  to  avoid  dependencies  from  third  countries.  We  will  not  allow 
Europe to be heavily reliant on Putin’s or any other autocrat’s resources in the future.  

The Russian war of aggression against Ukraine and our former dependency on Russian fossil 
fuels have taught us some lessons: clean energy is not only good for the planet but also for 
our  security.  As  we  are  moving  away  from  fossil  fuels,  by  develop  a  roadmap  towards  a 
resilient  energy  system  with  the  phasing  out  of  fossil  fuels  together  with  Member  States, 
towards an electrification and automation of our economy, we need enormous amounts of 
clean energy and greater energy efficiency. We have fast-tracked the permitting procedures 
to really get the scale. We have reformed our electricity market to give priority to renewables 
and give long-term contracts and improve investment conditions. We are using EU funds – 
REPowerEU  -  to  mobilise  close  to  €300  billion  in  resources.  And  we  are  strengthening  the 
clean-tech energy basis in Europe. Low-carbon energy has an important role in the transition 
to clean energy. We are lowering the marginal cost of energy throughout our economy. We 
are  developing  the  home  market  for  our  clean-tech  industries.  We  are  decarbonising  and 
revitalising  our  energy-intensive  industries  to  sell  clean  products  worldwide.  Thus,  we  are 
increasing our energy independence and overall sovereignty and resilience. 

As the backbone that connects European citizens and business, transport matters to us all. We 
have no time to lose in preparing it for the future. New technologies have the potential to 
revolutionise  the  way  we  move,  making  our  mobility  smarter,  more  efficient  and    more 
sustainable. We need more technology – not bans! 

The EPP advocates a technology-neutral approach to developing alternative fuels, hydrogen 
technologies,  and  new  power  trains  for  vehicles,  aircraft  and  vessels.  We  support  new 
sustainable liquid fuels since they can be used with the current refuelling infrastructures and 
supply  chains.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  concentrate  our  efforts  on  streamlining  the 
completion  and  development  of  the  new  Trans-European  Transport  Network  (TEN-T) 
infrastructures,  which  are  crucial  for  structuring  our  European  territory  and  enhancing  the 
efficiency of the European single market. 

2.4 Our Europe prospers and protects people and the planet 

Europe has a leading role to play in global climate protection. Our hallmark is the European 
Green Deal. The European Green Deal was born out of the necessity to protect people and 
the planet. But it was also designed as an opportunity to build our future prosperity. In 2022, 
for  instance,  greenhouse  gas  emissions  in  Europe  decreased  by  roughly  2.5%,  while  the 
economy increased by 3.5%. We have successfully reduced our emissions while growing our 
economy.  European  businesses  are  developing  new  technologies  and  solutions.  What  they 
need to scale up is, predictability, to plan their investments. And this is what the European 
Green Deal is delivering.  

 
 
Four years ago, we set a long-term perspective with the climate law and the 2050 target. We 
shifted the climate agenda to being an economic one. This has given a clear sense of direction 
for investment and innovation and a clear steer for Europe to become the first climate-neutral 
continent  by  2050.  As  we  enter  the  next  phase  of  the  European  Green  Deal,  the  phase  of 
implementation, we will keep supporting European industry throughout this transition - from 
the Net-Zero Industry Act to the Critical Raw Materials Act. With our Industry Strategy, we are 
looking at the risks to and needs of each ecosystem in this transition. The core aim will be to 
support  every  sector  in  building  its  business  model  for  the  decarbonisation  of  industry. 
Because we believe that this transition is essential for our future competitiveness in Europe. 
From wind to steel, from batteries to electric vehicles, our ambition is crystal clear: the future 
of our clean tech industry has to be made in Europe. 

To  achieve  our  ambitious  goals,  we  must  make  climate  policy  go  hand  in  hand  with  our 
economy and society. Because we know that, without climate protection, our economy cannot 
remain competitive in the long term but that, without a competitive economy, there can be 
no  sustainable  climate  protection  either.  The  Green  Deal  for  us  is  not  a  new  ideology  as 
advocated  by  the  Greens  or  the  Socialists,  it  is  the  hallmark  of  the  more  prosperous, 
innovative,  competitive  and  sustainable  Europe  that  the  EPP  envisions.    We  are  clearly 
committed to the 55% emissions-reduction target and the goal of climate neutrality by 2050. 
Europe must not de-industrialise on this ambitious path but, on the contrary, must show the 
world  that  the  carbon-neutral  transformation  can  be  achieved  successfully  through  our 
businesses. It is important to support our companies - especially SMEs, farmers and fishers - 
financially in the transition and to find the best solutions for reducing global emissions. We 
will  achieve  the  best  solutions  only  if  we  use  all  technological  possibilities  without  any 
prejudice or ideology. We defend the principle of technological neutrality as well as a policy 
built on creating incentives for businesses and industry. The EU can set targets for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions, but it must leave room for private, local and industrial players to 
find appropriate technological solutions. We regard a policy of positive incentives much more 
effective.  We  are  in  favour  of  technological  openness  in  the  economy,  energy  and  climate 
protection. Engineers, not politicians, together with the market should be deciding on the best 
technology in order to achieve carbon neutrality. We rely on innovative concepts and market-
based instruments for climate protection such as emissions trading, expansion of renewable 
and other low-carbon energies and a circular economy, including circular bio-economy. We 
want to further develop the Green Deal. We will always take the interests of our citizens and 
our entrepreneurs fully into account. All low-carbon energies are a key factor for successful 
climate protection. To make Europe’s energy secure and sovereign, we are creating an Energy 
Union.  We  want  to  strengthen  the 
internal  market  for  energy,  build  cross-border 
infrastructure and strengthen Europe as an energy location with research. For example, we 
need a rapid ramp-up of international hydrogen production, creating the conditions to enable 
a functioning transport infrastructure, as already provided for in the EU hydrogen strategy. We 
want to intensify research in the fields of energy, climate and materials and promote Europe 
as a research centre for innovative energy technologies, with a special focus on nuclear fusion.  

To keep our policies ambitious but also realistic, we intend to give greater consideration to the 
needs of cities and regions when preparing environmental, energy and climate strategies and 
their funding. At the same time, we will promote a circular economy in order to utilise raw 
materials  responsibly,  establish  a  CO2  circular  economy  throughout  Europe  and  promote 
sustainable companies, especially SMEs. We also aim to unlock investment in innovation for 

clean technologies with an investment plan for European jobs. We want strong support for 
clean  tech  and  more  strategic  sovereignty  in  the  field  of  future  technologies.  We  will 
strengthen  the  European  waste  reduction  strategy  and  the  European  plastics  strategy, 
especially with regard to microplastics. We will implement a strategy for water and air quality 
at  the  European  level  and  tackle  the  issue  of  per-  and  polyfluoroalkyl  substances  (PFAS). 
Climate protection is a common European challenge. We want the EU to become responsible 
for concluding international environmental agreements for the entire EU. 

2.5 Our Europe boosts living standards in every region 

We want to turn brain drain into brain gain. We will create opportunities for young people to 
allow families to remain together. Sometimes Europeans have no other option than to leave 
their country and their loved ones behind to find good opportunities. In Europe, no family 
should  be  forced  to  be  divided:  we  must  put  a  stop  to  brain  drain  by  providing  good 
opportunities in every region through our cohesion, economic and innovation policies. We 
want to set up a “Brain Gain” action plan for the whole of Europe that offers young people 
the chance to return to their home country from abroad and within Europe. Europe is our 
home and Europe cares about our homes. 

Europe will be united only if cities and rural areas act as one and their interests are taken into 
account  equally.  And  our  political  family  already  does  so:  not  only  is  the  EPP  the  most 
represented political force within the European Commission and European Council,  it is also 
largely represented on the ground, at local and regional level, more than any other party in 
Europe. Through structural and cohesion policies, for example, we will focus on closing the 
gap between rural and urban areas. There should be no first and second-class citizens. We 
want to close economic, social and territorial disparities.  

Regional and local budgets play a prominent part in supporting the national contributions to 
the EU budget and in co-financing EU projects implemented in regions and cities. Therefore, 
we have to elevate the needs of our regions and local communities when discussing the EU 
budget. Cohesion policy has a highly positive impact on the single market. It should remain 
strongly supported in the EU budget, but with simplified rules and with the direct involvement 
of regional and local authorities in the design and implementation of programmes. We want 
to  improve  the  subsidiarity  check  also  by  assessing  the  territorial  impact  of  all  new  EU 
legislation. We will promote a European plan for rural areas, including vulnerable areas near 
the EU external border that have suffered from the consequences of Russian aggression and 
to strengthen the EU strategy for Outermost Regions. At the same time, we need to develop 
modern infrastructure so that people can easily connect and data and products are accessible 
everywhere  in  Europe.  To  this  end,  we  want  to  accelerate  investments  in  R&D  and  digital 
infrastructure, in line with our industrial policy. We need to speed up funding procedures for 
the  next  generation  of  innovators,  students  and  civil  society  all  over  Europe.  We  want  to 
ensure that innovation capacities, access to connectivity, online tools and technologies that 
support education, research and business are available to all citizens, including in rural and 
remote areas, taking into special consideration the challenges faced by outermost regions. A 
good  regional  policy,  especially  in  economic  terms,  is  the  best  response  to  demographic 
change. We want a new pact for intergenerational fairness, making sure our choices today do 
not burden the generations of tomorrow, including a youth and elderly proof check of all EU 

 
legislation. At the same time, labour mobility remains a cornerstone of a functioning internal 
market and of a long-term growth that boosts employment and careers for the people. 

2.6 Our Europe wants to lead in digitalisation and human-centred AI  

Innovation improves people’s lives. Against the advances of China and the US, Europe has a 
globally competitive advantage: our common values, the social market economy and political 
stability. As Christian Democrats and the Centre Right, we put the people at the centre. When 
we combine values and innovation, we can shape the future of our European way of life and 
create  jobs.  Placing  our  citizens  in  the  centre  of  our  innovation  policy  means  pooling  our 
resources to find the best solutions for everyone. AI, biomedicine, robotics and visualisation 
can, in combination with the right human know-how and sensible regulation, create a better 
world. We want to put these technologies at the service of the people by making seniors more 
independent and advancing research to find solutions in sensitive areas, for example  novel 
prevention  strategies  and  treatments  in  health,    better  counter  climate  change,    avoid 
environmental disasters, improve mobility and make construction works more efficient and 
safer.  Non-digital  services  should  remain  accessible  for  people  without  easy  digital  access, 
especially for the elderly. However, Europe needs to regain its ambition.  

Today, we are investing only half as much in AI as the US. European companies are allocating 
a  smaller  proportion  of  their  earnings  to  R&D  than  their  North  American  counterparts,  a 
shortfall of around €147 billion between 2017 and 2022. Especially in established economies 
such as Europe, economic growth and future prosperity can be achieved only with innovation 
and a technological edge. Data, digital infrastructure and technological expertise are the new 
gold of an economy. We want to encourage a digital awakening in the coming years and pursue 
a five-point plan for this by firstly expanding a European digital network across Europe for 5G 
and 6G together with the Member States. Secondly, the EU must be a leading force in AI. We 
want to enable, develop and utilise AI, not contain it or hinder it through over-regulation. We 
want to support research and the development of applications and provide freedom. We must 
readjust  our  data  protection  to  the  requirements  of  the  digital  world.  Thirdly,  we  want  to 
ensure that AI lives up to ethical standards while supporting innovation and new technologies, 
harnessing the power of AI to create quality jobs and a better life for our people. Fundamental 
rights in the digital world must be respected. We will do so by updating the EU charter of 
fundamental  rights  in  light  of  the  digital  revolution.  Fourthly,  we  want  to  establish  a  real 
innovation  union  for  future  technologies  by  backing  European  pilot  line  infrastructure  for 
semiconductor innovations better connecting scientific expertise and creating, for example, 
scientific centres of excellence such as a CERN for AI and an EU research-computing centre to 
simplify the exchange and data across Europe. Finally, all of this requires sufficient funding.  

2.7 Our Europe stands by our farmers and fishers to ensure the production of healthy 
and affordable food for all  

European  agriculture  and  the  Common  Agricultural  Policy  meet  the  high  expectations  of 
society, in particular with regard to food supply, high food quality and safety, protection of 
natural resources, animal welfare and, last but not least, fair product prices for consumers. 
Food security is not a luxury but a fundamental necessity. The EPP has always stood by farmers 

 
 
and  fishers,  particularly  when  living  costs  are  rising  for  our  citizens  and  food  security  and 
availability are on the line due to the many global challenges. Farming and fisheries are two 
strategic sectors for Europe. Farmers and their businesses make the face of our rural Europe 
unique. We are proud of them and stand by their side. Rural areas are not the periphery but 
the heart of Europe. By 2040, the EU might lose an additional 6.4 million farms, a staggering 
decrease of over 60% compared to 2016! We want farmers in Europe to have a future and 
stand for dialogue instead of top-down approaches. This is the only way to secure our unique 
cultural landscapes and our food supply in the long term. Climate protection, biodiversity and 
sustainable  landscape  conservation  can  be  achieved  only  with  and  not  against  farmers. 
Protecting biodiversity and precious resources such as water, air and forests is our insurance 
for the future. We want to strengthen Europe’s resilience to droughts, which jeopardise our 
farmers’ jobs and our food security, with a European Resilience Scoreboard to better prevent 
natural disasters and make regions, cities and villages more resilient in agriculture and food 
production, and with a European plan for water use, reuse and storage. Climate adaptation 
and sustainable management are core European tasks. To this end, we want to find examples 
of best practices, particularly in coastal and flood protection measures.  

In recent years, fishers have faced successive crises derived from the impact of Brexit, COVID 
and the war in Ukraine, with the rise in fuel prices. They also face important challenges such 
as climate change, the decarbonisation of the fleet and the problem of generational renewal. 
We are also in favour of a reform to the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) so that it also takes 
into  account  the  need  to  face  these  and  other  challenges.  Fisheries  and  aquaculture  are 
strategic sectors.  The EPP stands for creating a stand-alone portfolio on fisheries in the next 
European  Commission.  If  that  were  not  possible,  the  fishing  responsibilities  should  be 
assumed by the Commissioner for Agriculture and Fisheries, as was the case in the past. 

Our fisheries are crucial to ensuring quality supply and reducing dependency on imports. We 
should  focus  on  developing  legislation  and  financing  instruments  that  strongly  back  the 
fisheries sector in its transition towards a more sustainable catch. Monitoring and reporting 
of fishing activities may be necessary, but the administrative burden should be reduced and 
rationalised. 

The CAP 2028-2034 must have a stronger economic pillar and direct payments should serve 
to secure basic agricultural incomes and offer protection in volatile markets. It must enable a 
strong  and  competitive  agricultural  sector  and  provide  a  genuine  reward  for  the  diverse 
services  provided  by  agriculture.  In  addition,  we  must  make  sure  that  the  CAP  funding  is 
distributed fairly both among and within Member States. Flexibility should be a key factor for 
the new CAP in order to guarantee producers’ incomes. European farmers produce the highest 
standards in the world and these standards must be designed in a way that maintains the 
competitiveness  of  European  agriculture  worldwide.  We  also  consider  that  adequate  and 
additional  funding  is  necessary  to  facilitate  our  farmers’  environmental  efforts,  incentivise 
them  to  operate  more  sustainable  and  help  them  face  the  consequences  of  climate 
change. We focus on promoting modern and sustainable agricultural practices and high-tech 
in  agriculture.  We  want  a  European  moon-shot  for  precision  agriculture,  integrated  pest 
management, closing the nutrients cycle, and the use of robotics. Especially in agriculture and 
fisheries, the ambitious goals should be solved with technological innovations, not with bans. 
Rural development should continue to serve as a stimulus for agriculture and the population 
in rural areas and ensure vital rural areas, including via better rural-urban synergies in terms 
of  interconnected  public  services  and  boosting  of  local  economy  and  local  jobs.  Particular 

attention  should  be  paid  to  supporting  disadvantaged  rural  areas,  public  research  and 
innovation to develop alternatives to plant protection products. We want to accelerate the 
take-up of new biotechnologies in agriculture as they can be effective tools against climate-
related  risks.  For  us,  agriculture  and  fisheries  are  sectors  of  the  future  and  we  want  the 
younger generation to be passionate about these professions. Together with Member States, 
we want to ensure that young people who choose agriculture have access to land. We oppose 
excessive  requirements  and  additional  burdens  for  our  farmers.  And  we  have  to  further 
develop the European Green Deal by a better consideration of the interests of consumers and 
farmers. This applies in particular to issues such as new rules on the sustainable use of plant 
protection  products  (SUR)  and  unnecessary  bureaucracy. Furthermore,  a  review  of  Natura 
2000 legislation is needed, enabling Member States to more effectively protect nature and 
make it more resilient. 

Large  carnivores  represent  an  increasing  threat  to  farmers  and  livestock  breeders  and 
endanger traditional pastoralism throughout Europe. Therefore, we need new rules for the 
management  of  large  carnivore  populations,  especially  wolves  and  brown  bears,  including 
culling when densities reach unsustainable levels. Forests and the entire forest-based value 
chain are a crucial part of rural areas. Forests provide jobs, ensure economic welfare, store 
carbon, offer health-benefits and combat desertification. We believe the best know-how for 
sustainable  forest  management  lies  within  the  Member  States.,  Therefore,  we  respect  the 
Member States’ competences on forest-related legislation.  

III. 

Our Europe believes in our European way of life  

The  EPP  is  the  party  of  the  European  way  of  life.  We  combine  tradition  and  progress  and 
believe in a united Europe in diversity. Europe is more than an economic project rooted in 
cultural richness and diverse traditions, but this does not tie us to the past. On the contrary: 
our values show us the way into the future and we commit to promoting democratic values 
via education and culture. 

3.1 Our Europe defends our European social model 

Our quality of life depends on social peace. The future of Europe will be built with and by our 
social partners. Social dialogue is a core feature of our European social market economy and 
is key to decent working conditions and economic prosperity. We are proud of our European 
social  model,  where  everyone  enjoys  health  insurance  and  high-quality  public  and  social 
services, where workers have their rights protected and where there is balance between social 
interests and market rules. However, social balance is not achieved effortlessly but must be 
sensitively reached to ensure it is balanced and fair. The European Pillar of Social Rights has 
been the reference point for building a strong social Europe. While it is in the hands of the 
Member  States  to  run  the  national  welfare  state,  it  is  Europe  that  can  contribute  to  the 
conditions  for  economic  growth  and  prosperity  to  finance  them.  We  are  fighting  for  equal 
opportunities  for  women  in  the  labour  market.  We  want  to  ensure  that  men  and  women 
receive equal pay for equal work. We also want to create a European Workers’ Guarantee for 
the Digital Market to ensure the rights of workers and the self-employed in the digital age, for 
instance  in  the  gig  economy,  while  respecting  the  competences  of  Member  States  and 

 
 
 
empowering social partners. We want to ensure quality jobs and fair wages across Europe and 
enhance  collective  bargaining.  The  fight  against  precarious  working  conditions,  both  at 
national level and across our borders to protect our workers from illegal working practices, is 
crucial for a well-functioning single market. Today’s work models must allow parents to find 
the right balance between their professional careers and family duties through greater use of 
teleworking, for example. For us, however, a true social policy is not about setting the highest 
social  benefits  and  standards  at  EU  level  but  about  consistently  guiding  the  economic  and 
financial policy in such a way that there will continue to be efficient social systems that support 
people in all our Member States in the future. We reject a sprawling EU social bureaucracy. It 
is not without reason that Christian social teaching has enshrined and promoted the principle 
times  of  digital,  climate-neutral  and  demographic 
of  subsidiarity.  Especially 
transformations, our social systems are already facing enormous challenges. They do not need 
too many regulations from Brussels but rather a flourishing and fair economy. A fair Europe 
must take into account lower and middle class households. The cost of living crisis  threatening 
many households, young and old, has led to an erosion of the middle class and a growing 
number of people losing out in the single market. This has a negative impact on our societies 
and our economies. The heroes of everyday life must also be rewarded in the tax systems of 
the Member States.  

in 

3.2 Our Europe preserve our democracy, traditions, cultural richness and diversity  

We are proud of our European way of life. We want to preserve our regional and national 
identities as well as our common European one. In Europe, we know that our differences, but 
also what we have in common, make us stronger.  

We want to preserve our cultural heritage, which our community, civilisation and European 
integration processes are based on, the different characteristics as well as what unites us, in 
a Digital Museum of European Culture that digitally connects the most important museums. 
We will assess the possibility of creating a European Cultural Heritage Fund. We commit to 
promoting our rich cultural heritage, which will also contribute to boost tourism in the EU, a 
sector that was heavily hit by the COVID pandemic. As a response, the EPP led the key EU 
initiatives, notably the EU Digital COVID Certificate. Within the limits of EU competences, the 
EPP remains committed to bolstering the tourism sector. 

Europe is diverse and nuanced but we have a shared Judeo-Christian culture and heritage. We 
also share the heritage of Humanism and of the Enlightenment. In the EU, we respect the 
freedom  of  belief  and  conscience  and  thus  the  freedom  of  religion.  We  must  protect  our 
European  way  of  life  by  preserving  our  Christian  values  and  our  fundamental  principles. 
Democracy, human dignity, fundamental rights, including rights of minorities  and of the most 
vulnerable, freedom, equality, equal rights for women and men, solidarity, the rule of law, 
justice,  pluralism  and  tolerance  towards  those  who  live  a  different  way:  these  are  the 
principles at the core of European civilisation.  

Over the past years, the EPP has been the leading defender of the rule of law in the EU, making 
it clear that our community is based on values and that these must be respected, notably EU 
fundamental values. Countries that join the EU have voluntarily signed up to these values and 
there should therefore be consequences for serious and systemic breaches of the rule of law. 
The mechanism provided in the treaty has clearly failed to serve its purpose, whether as a 

 
deterrent or as an adequate sanction mechanism. This is why the EPP secured the approval of 
a new Rule-of-Law conditionality mechanism that ensures that EU funds would stop flowing 
into governments that breach the rule of law. The EU is not a cash-cow and governments that 
do not subscribe to our common values cannot expect to benefit from EU funds.  

The EPP is strongly committed to remaining the leading defender of the rule of law so that all 
citizens in all Member States can feel equally protected from those who attack our values, 
including their own governments. The EPP will ensure that the Rule-of-Law mechanism is not 
only applied in a fair and non-partisan manner but that it is refined to ensure its adequacy 
and effectiveness.  

We  will  preserve  our  common  traditions  and  convictions,  our  cultural  richness  and  our 
linguistic  diversity  represented  by  traditional  national  minorities.  We  continue  the  fight 
against  all  forms  of  discrimination,  opposing  racism,  intolerance,  violence,  hate  crime  and 
anti-Semitism  as  well  as  protecting  LGBTQ+  rights  and  those  of  minorities.  We  stand  for 
religious freedom. We will advocate an EU foreign policy that makes it very clear that those 
who persecute Christians can neither do good business nor have good relations with Europe.  

Our national identity is open but not for sale. We invite legal migrants who live with us to 
become part of our community by integrating themselves and by learning our languages and 
our values, but we fight the sale of EU citizenship. Selling EU citizenship to the highest bidder 
is  a  direct  threat  to  our  security  as  it  leaves  Europe  to  the  influence  of  every  oligarch  and 
kleptocrat  who  can  afford  it.  We  will  not  allow  them  to  undermine  the  meaning  of  our 
citizenship.  We  want  to  protect  citizens  and  our  democracy  against  fake  news  and  foreign 
interference, including by strengthening citizens’ resilience, particularly in education, as well 
as ensure access to quality information. To this end, we want social media platforms to take 
more responsibility in the fight against misinformation and, in cooperation with journalists' 
organisations, strengthen fact-checking.  Not being able to tell what is real and what is fake is 
one of the biggest threats to our democracy and to the stability of our communities. Putin’s 
attempts to rewrite history and to distract from his crimes by spreading lies must be prevented 
and unequivocally condemned. We have to ensure a strong resilience of our citizens against 
any form of propaganda from the Kremlin or against any other foreign interference. 

3.3 Our Europe takes care of our families and those most in need in society  

We believe in a Europe of solidarity that works together, includes everyone, offers the best 
conditions to everyone for starting a family and ensures that older people can enjoy longevity 
with dignity. Our Europe does not take care of everything itself but leaves no one behind. Our 
families are our roots, our home, and our anchors. They are the pillar of our European way of 
life. In times of crisis, young Europeans, parents and grandparents have supported each other. 
Family ties are the backbone of our community and we want to preserve them. We will defend 
European social standards, raise living standards to strengthen families and fight child poverty. 
At  the  same  time, job  insecurity,  the  inability  to  afford  a  house  and  uncertainty  about  the 
future all too often discourage young Europeans from creating a family. In the EU, on average, 
only  one  in  four  households  has  children.  We  want  Europe  to  be  a  safe  home  where  new 
families can grow. We are committed to a Europe-wide parental leave so that young parents 
can be with their newborn children and experience the first steps of parenthood together and 
later  be  easily  reintroduced  into  professional  life  with  measures  such  as  accessible  house 

 
ownership and child-care as well as ensuring better quality of public services. We will protect 
family values and respect subsidiarity. Family law must remain in the hands of the Member 
States because family life must be supported at a level that is closer to the citizen. 

Our Europe is a society driven by intergenerational connections and fairness. A society where 
all  ages  -    young  citizens,  parents,  families,  singles  and  older  citizens  –  can  thrive. 
Intergenerational solidarity is a cornerstone for our society, which supports exchanges across 
generations, including by volunteering. 

      3.4 Our Europe is a Europe for citizens of all ages 

Demographic  change  will  be  a  huge  challenge  in  the  coming  legislative  period.  Strategic 
questions  related  to  the  labour  market,  innovation,  healthcare  and  regional  disparities  will 
have to be tackled. For this reason, the importance of this issue should also be reflected in the 
organisational structure of the future by an important portfolio and sufficient resources. The 
impact  of  demographic  change  requires  collaborative  efforts  across  different  levels  of 
government. The EU can play a supportive and encouraging role here, including by means of 
appropriate structures and financial support. The EU has to play a supportive and encouraging 
role here. For this reason, a Commission Vice-President will continue to be responsible for this 
cross-cutting  task  and  will  be  supported  by  appropriate  instruments,  for  example  a 
coordinating agency within the existing structures. 

An  ageing  society  presents  challenges,  but  we  also  see  many  opportunities.  In  an  ageing 
society, we will underpin active and healthy ageing for all generations and further develop the 
"silver”,  longevity  economy.  Seniors  are  increasingly  shaping  our  economies  and  starting 
businesses.  We  want  to  create  the  conditions  for  older  people  to  be  able  to  develop 
economically by capitalising on the longevity dividend and on their know-how and experience. 
We want to move from an ageing to a longevity society by empowering older citizens. Entire 
and equal involvement of older persons who want to stay active on the labour market and in 
political activities, access to culture, justice, life-long learning, and digital literacy and financial 
must be ensured. Empowering people so that they are confident in managing their personal 
finances is key. We want to ensure a focus on financial literacy, in a digital era, to strengthen 
our families and our society. In an increasingly digitalised financial landscape, we must also 
ensure citizens’ choice between the use digital means or cash and the accessibility of financial 
services for older people. In addition, we want to invest in age-friendly, innovative and truly 
intergenerational cities and regions.  

A key task will be to strengthen the European Care Strategy and to implement solutions for 
affordable long-term care for the elderly and other vulnerable individuals in all communities 
and to implement a European Disability Card so that the rights of those affected are recognised 
and acknowledged throughout Europe. We are in favour of establishing a European Guarantee 
for  older  citizens  to  ensure  social  inclusion  and  their  full  participation  in  society  and  the 
economy.  We are all ageing and we care. Europe cares.  

3.5 Our Europe improves people’s lives through innovation in health 

 
 
As  Christian  Democrats,  we  always  put  the  well-being  of  the  person  at  the  centre  of  our 
actions. We are the political force that placed health high on the European political agenda in 
past years by delivering a concrete European Beating Cancer Plan that foresees  funding of €4 
billion.  This  is  because  we  know  that  health  issues  transcend  national  borders.  We  want 
accessible quality healthcare for all citizens, irrespective of socio-economic status or where 
they come from. Reducing health inequalities should be the core mission of the EU. For this 
purpose, it is crucial to eliminate the pay gap to stop the drain of health professionals from 
some European regions, especially in rural areas.  

We want to create a true European Health Union to be prepared and equipped to deal with 
cross-border threats, improve the resilience of our health systems and their interoperability, 
train the best doctors and nurses, diversify our supply chains and create strategic inventories 
to prevent medicine and medical devices shortages, making them accessible to every citizen. 
We also want to become the world leader in medical research  and pharmaceutical innovation 
while increasing access to clinical trials, especially to fight rare child diseases such as cancer 
that do not get enough funding for research. We want to double the EU’s research budget for 
the period 2024-2027 while setting a target of 4% of European GDP devoted to research and 
innovation by 2030. 

We want Europe to become the innovation hub of the world in the health sector, harnessing 
the potential of big data and AI to make the technological discoveries of the future, just as we 
developed the COVID-19 vaccine with the mRNA technology in record time. Europe must once 
again  become  the  laboratory  of  the  world  where  evidence-based  politics  and  regulations 
enable  the  development  of  the  best  innovations  and  medicine.  While  ensuring  the  full 
implementation  of  the  Beating  Cancer  Plan,  we  want  to  take  the  next  step  and  develop  a 
European  plan  to  address  Alzheimer’s  disease,  dementia  and  Parkinson’s  disease.  We  will 
launch a European Cardiovascular Health Plan, as cardiovascular disease is the biggest killer 
in  the  EU.  This  plan  should  include  a  European  Knowledge  Centre  and  promote  a  Joint 
cardiovascular and diabetes health check, as 85% of the people living with diabetes die from 
cardiovascular disease. In light of our ageing society, investment in healthy longevity is the 
best  way  to  alleviate  the  burden  of  ageing  on  budgets  and  to  make  our  longer  lives  also 
healthier. 

We  know  that  physical  well-being  is  not  all  there  is  to  health.  Mental  health  is  equally 
important as Europeans increasingly call for affordable and accessible quality psychological 
support. That is why we are committed to launching an EU Action Plan for Mental Health to 
ensure  all  Europeans  in  need  have  access  to  the  appropriate  psychological  aid  while 
eliminating the stigma often associated with mental illness. 

3.6 Our Europe is fit for new challenges 

Our Europe concentrates on the essentials, never loses sight of the big picture and always 
fights  for  what  is  important.  Many  Socialists  were  initially  sceptical  about  European 
unification, the Greens even tried to legally prevent the introduction of the single market and 
some liberals caused serious damage to a democratic Europe at a decisive moment, not to 
mention the right-wing populists who want to destroy our Europe today. We as the EPP stand 
for a strong and effective EU that we will successfully lead into the future. 

 
In order to tackle the enormous challenges in a world in turmoil, the EU must also improve its 
institutions. We want to make the EU more capable of acting, more efficient, stronger and 
more  democratic.  At  the  same  time,  the  Member  States  will  continue  to  have  the  right  to 
decide which competences the EU should have and which ones could possibly be transferred 
back. To this end, we want to have a European convention in the coming years to discuss and 
decide on possible improvements to the Treaties.  We will also keep developing strategies to 
improve the proximity of the EU to its citizens, involving civil society in this process. 

We  stand  by  the  EU’s  accession  promises  and  a  forward-looking  enlargement  strategy  for 
Ukraine, the Western Balkans, Moldova and Georgia. Every candidate country must also be 
ready  for  membership.  We  should  take  intermediate  steps  and  closer  cooperation  in  the 
meantime to put candidates in the best position to join.   

We consider that all candidate countries shall be bound by the same rules on the way to full 
membership.  We  do  not  want  an  endless  process,  but  all  accession  criteria  (Copenhagen 
criteria) must be clearly met for the EU to enlarge. Any decision must be based on concrete 
results provided by candidate countries.  We evaluate each candidate on the basis of merit, 
respect of democratic institutions, the rule of law and the protection of human rights as well 
as  good  neighbourly  relations  with  all  EU  Member  States.  These  are  the  minimum 
prerequisites for every state that has the aspiration of joining the EU.  

While acknowledging that the current political situation in Turkey rules out the possibility of 
Turkey’s accession to the EU, we believe that an upgrade of the existing customs union and 
visa facilitation could pave the way to its European vocation and serve as a signal to a renewed 
and positive EU-Turkey partnership.  

We have been standing by Belarusians in their fight for democracy and freedom for years and 
we  will  keep  supporting  the  people  of  Belarus  and  their  democratic  leaders  in  their  fight 
against Lukashenka’s regime. Once the democratic breakthrough happens, Belarus should also 
be able to enter the European path of peace and prosperity. 

IV. 

Let’s build Europe together 

Europe  is  our  home.  We,  Europeans,  have  a  long  history  of  standing  together.  From  the 
devastation caused by authoritarian regimes, we rolled up our sleeves, rebuilt our freedom 
and united Europe. Together, we have made our incredible success possible. But nothing is 
perfect and everything can be improved.  And that’s what the next European elections are 
about - what Europe will look like in 2030. As the EPP, we have a clear vision of what Europe 
should look like in 2030. We want more unity, security and prosperity. To get there, we need 
values  and  leadership.  This  is  what  the  EPP,  under  the  leadership  of  European  Commission 
President Ursula von der Leyen, the EPP Commission Vice-Presidents and Commissioners, the 
EPP Group in the European Parliament and the EPP members of the Council, has shown over 
the past five years. EPP leadership has united Europe by forging a common vaccine, a common 
economic  recovery  and  common  sanctions  against  Russia  and  by  giving  hope  to  Ukraine 
together. We build bridges where others only create divisions. We have a plan for a Europe 
that takes responsibility for all citizens, our economies, our families, our women,  our youth 
and    our  elderly.  For  a  Europe  that  safeguards  our  planet,  competes  boldly  in  the  world, 

 
protects its citizens and always puts people first. Let's make Europe a safe and good home for 
the people! 

Rue du Commerce 10 
1000 Brussels
T +32-2-2854140
E connect@epp.eu

If  you have any question you 
would like to ask please contact us.

