PES manifesto
for the 2024 
European elections

Adopted at the 
2024 PES Election Congress, 
2 March, Rome

As the Party of European Socialists, the largest progressive force in Europe, we head into the 2024 European 
elections with continued determination to transform our societies and improve the lives of European citizens. 

We want a free, fair and secure democratic Europe. We believe in Europe as the force to guarantee rights for 
all and with all. We believe in working together to keep our planet liveable, to achieve social justice and to off er 
new opportunities for everyone. We are building a Europe of sustainability and democracy. A feminist Europe. 
An inclusive Europe founded on universal human rights. A Europe where social, economic and environmental 
progress go hand in hand. A Europe supportive of its young people. A Europe that promotes culture in all its 
diversity. For us, Europe has always been a project of peace and shared prosperity. A project of solidarity that 
allows our countries to overcome challenges that they could not face alone. By joining forces, we are building a 
Europe that achieves great things we can be proud of.

Successive crises and emerging threats have deﬁ ned the period since the 2019 European elections. Yet, in dif-
ﬁ cult circumstances, we have shown that a Europe that protects its people and provides hope for a better fu-
ture is possible. We worked hard to deliver progressive solutions to the rising cost of living; to the climate emer-
gency; to the shift to clean energy; to the Covid-19 pandemic; and to the Russian aggression against Ukraine. 

Today, many challenges remain ahead of us. Against a backdrop of war and conﬂ ict on our continent and in our 
neighbourhood, as well as rising authoritarianism worldwide, Europe must be a guarantor of peace, promote 
the respect of international law and fair international relations, and stand up for the United Nations Charter 
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Europe must be ready to ensure its security and defence. The 
EU must also tackle inequalities within our borders, the loss of purchasing power due to the rising cost of living, 
the backlash against women’s rights, the ever-growing diffi  culties young people face, and the undermining 
of democracy and the rule of law. We want a more united Europe that protects our sovereignty, our welfare 
states and invests in quality green jobs, sustainable wellbeing and a dynamic economy.

The far right is a threat to citizens and to the European project. It is a poison for democracy. Our values are 
irreconcilable with theirs. The far right wants to pit people against each other, while we want to bring people 
together. Our political family has a clear red line: we will never cooperate nor form coalitions with the far right. 
A stronger Socialist & Democratic Group in the European Parliament means more power to deliver respect, 
justice and a better future. More power to provide citizens with equal opportunities, a sense of security and 
the quality of life that everyone deserves. To ﬁ ght the far right, we must be the main progressive pro-European 
force, mobilising progressive, social, and environmental forces to deliver change.

In this manifesto, we put forward 20 commitments for our common candidate and our parties, for a Europe 
based on:

•  The right to quality jobs with fair wages by guaranteeing workers’ rights, strengthening collective bargain-

ing, democracy at work and supporting the self-employed.

•  A new Green and Social Deal for a just transition with clean, secure and aff ordable energy; new quality jobs 

in a green, carbon-free circular economy; and a liveable planet.

•  Strong democracy, where the rule of law is respected and defended by all.
•  A strong and competitive European economy that prepares its industries and SMEs for the future.
•  A protective Europe that defends people against the high cost of living, defends their jobs from unfair com-

petition, and defends their health and their environment.

•  A feminist Europe that stands up for equal rights, women’s control over their lives and bodies, and for an 

end to gender-based violence and discrimination.

•  A Europe for young people that guarantees progress, autonomy, opportunities and eradicates job insecurity. 
•  The right to decent and aff  ordable housing for all.
•  A strategically independent Europe that defends its freedom, security and territorial integrity.
•  A strong Europe in the world that promotes peace, security, cooperation, human rights and sustainable 

development.

I.
SOLUTIONS FOR 
A BETTER QUALITY
OF LIFE 

1. SECURING QUALITY JOBS FOR ALL

As employment rates rise in Europe, more jobs must mean better jobs 
and fair wages. Salaries must rise and boost workers’ purchasing power 
against inﬂ ation and the rising cost of living. We have fought alongside 
trade unions for decent minimum wages, pay transparency, the rights of 
platform workers, and collective bargaining. The world of work is chang-
ing. Malaise and discontent are growing, driven by job insecurity, in-
creased precarious work, low pay and unpredictable working time.

• We will act with a Roadmap for Quality Work and Well-paid Jobs. 
• Our next battles will be to combat in-work poverty, close gender gaps 
by 2030, regulate AI, limit the pay gap between workers, reach zero 
deaths at work, ensure the right to disconnect, reduce working time, end 
labour exploitation and work-related crime, develop job guarantees at 
local level and add a Social Progress Protocol to the Treaties. 

• We remain committed to the adoption and implementation of the Plat-

form Workers’ Directive.

• We continue to ﬁ ght unemployment, poverty and social exclusion. No 

one should be left without an adequate minimum income.

• We will continue to push for workers’ participation, co-determination 

and democracy at work with stronger European Works Councils. 

• We will continue to ﬁ ght for the full implementation of the European 

Pillar of Social Rights.

• We will always protect trade union rights, encourage collective bargain-

ing and social dialogue and make sure that the EU and the Member 
States respect the autonomy of social partners.

• We want a strengthened European Labour Authority.
• To meet the climate challenge and make sure everyone can harness 

the potential of digitalisation, we support equipping workers with new 
skills, the right to training during paid working time, and new sustain-
able jobs by strengthening the Just Transition Fund and Social Climate 
Fund. To guarantee success and social progress, trade unions must be 
closely associated to this process.

2. A NEW GREEN SOCIAL DEAL FOR A JUST 
TRANSITION 

Social justice and climate justice are interconnected: the most vulnerable 
are paying the highest price for the climate emergency. Climate neutrality 
must be a force for social progress. Faced with the increasingly damaging 
eff ects of climate change, we must prepare and adapt. 

• We will implement a Green Deal with a red heart, allying social and eco-

logical policies. In our eff orts to reach climate neutrality, no one should be 
abandoned and there should be no pause.

• We will continue to invest in renewable energy and energy effi  ciency, 

to be climate neutral by 2050 at the latest, by achieving strong EU 2040 
climate targets. 

• Our ultimate objective is to reach a completely renewable and clean 

energy mix, securing national and European interests. 

Today high energy prices hit households. They also hit SMEs, businesses 
and our economies. For us a key EU priority must be to secure aff  ordable, 
and reliable energy supply for all. 

• We will combat energy poverty and the burden of high energy prices 

and will guarantee supply for the most vulnerable. 

• We strive for the reform of the energy market to guarantee price stabil-
ity and aff ordability, to modernise our infrastructures and strengthen 
Europe’s strategic autonomy.

3. A STRONG AND OPEN EUROPEAN 
ECONOMY IN THE WORLD

We want to promote the European model of social market economy, using 
public investments at the local, regional, national and EU level to develop a 
resilient, sustainable, and fair economy that delivers quality jobs.

• We want an Investment Plan for the Green and Digital Transitions to cre-
ate new jobs and to reindustrialise our economy and make it innovative, 
competitive and circular. 

• We want a “Made in Europe” Strategy and joint ﬁ nancing for projects of 

common interest in Europe.

• SMEs, the self-employed, start-ups, cooperatives and social economy 

enterprises are essential and must be supported, especially female and 
young entrepreneurs. 

• We support a fair Single Market for goods and services, with clear state 
aid rules and a new approach to competition policy that levels the global 
playing ﬁ eld for European industries.

• We want to strengthen Europe’s sovereignty by delivering security of 

supply in energy, raw materials, technologies, medicines and food through 
investments and international trade.

We say no to austerity. We say yes to protecting workers from crises; to regu-
lating the ﬁ nancial markets; to combating speculation; to an EU architecture 
that empowers Member States to invest in a green and social future. During 
Covid-19 we proved that initiatives like NextGenerationEU, SURE, and other 
policies secure growth and economic resilience, and reduce inequalities. 

• It is time for a permanent EU investment capacity and an ambitious Euro-

pean budget. 

• In cases of crisis, the EU should support Member States against unem-

ployment with a complementary unemployment reinsurance mechanism, 
learning the lessons from the pandemic. 

• Stricter procurement rules including for EU funds must ensure recipients 

of public money respect workers’ rights and collective bargaining.

• Social rights must take precedence over economic interests, reinforcing 

the social dimension of the European Union. 

4. TAX JUSTICE FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE

6. ACCESS TO HEALTH, CARE AND MEDICINE

Our commitment to tax justice is a commitment to equal societies. 
A fair tax system strengthens our European social model and sup-
ports investments in our economies, public services and security. 

• Large corporations, big polluters and the ultra-rich must pay 
their fair share in Europe and around the world, through ef-
fective taxes on corporations, windfall proﬁ ts, capital, ﬁ nancial 
transactions and the wealthiest individuals. 

• We ﬁ ght to make sure taxes are paid where proﬁ ts are made, 
building on our success in achieving a Global Minimum Corpo-
rate Tax Rate. 

• We ﬁ ght against tax fraud and tax havens inside and outside 
the EU and want to move towards the extension of qualiﬁ ed 
majority voting in speciﬁ c tax matters. 

• Tax systems must be rid of all gender discrimination. 

Universal access to quality health and social care are fundamen-
tal rights. Covid-19 showed the essential contribution of the care 
sector to society, including hospitals, doctors, and nurses, and 
the importance of European cooperation against health threats. 

• We will defend public healthcare that creates quality jobs. 
• We want a European Health Union that manages cross-border 
pandemic responses and supports and respects public health-
care at the national level. 

• We call for a strong European Mental Health Strategy. 
• We will implement fair and transparent medicine pricing to 

prevent shortages and support timely access and innovation, 
including for rare diseases. 

• We support initiatives for common European public research 
on vaccines, lifesaving medicines, and antimicrobial resistance.

5. THE RIGHT TO QUALITY AND AFFORDABLE 
HOUSING 

7. PUBLIC SERVICES AT THE HEART OF OUR 
SOCIETY

Too many people – often the young, single parents and the 
vulnerable – struggle to ﬁ nd aff ordable, quality and energy-
effi  cient housing. 

• We will implement a European Plan for Aff  ordable Housing 
with related investments and an EU Strategy for Combatting 
Homelessness. 

• To tackle high energy bills and poverty, we will foster invest-
ments in the Renovation Wave to make public and private 
buildings more energy effi  cient.

Well-funded public services provide security against the hard-
ships of life, promote wellbeing, and are essential for the func-
tioning of our economy. Everyone’s access must be guaranteed, 
from the youngest to the oldest, from the largest city to the 
most remote village. 

• We will guarantee quality healthcare, aff  ordable access to 
energy and water, inclusive education and lifelong learning 
opportunities, and effi  cient public services accessible by all. 
• The EU must ﬁ ght mobility poverty and support clean, aff ord-
able and sustainable public transport in all regions, including 
a large railway network. 

• The right to knowledge and culture is a fundamental condi-

tion of democracy.

8. SECURING THE ENVIRONMENT AND 
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE

This planet is all we have. Through the Green Deal, we will diminish our 
environmental footprint; restore and care for our forests; clean our air, wa-
ter and soil; and protect ecosystems. We will secure our environment, sus-
tainable agriculture, rural development, biodiversity, and people’s health. 

• We will ﬁ ght plastic and chemical pollution, especially PFAS — “forever 

chemicals” — and microplastics. 

• Water is a vital resource. We will develop effi  cient and sustainable water 

protection and management. 

• The EU must protect the diversity of species and animal welfare. 

Climate and biodiversity crises are real threats to food security and to the 
livelihood of farmers. Europe’s rural areas are the chain that connects our 
lands, our communities, our foods and our ecosystems. 

• We need to strengthen the EU’s common agricultural policy to support 
farmers, especially young, women, and small-scale farmers, and agricul-
tural workers. 

• We want to support farmers’ incomes and jobs, while protecting them 
from unfair competition from third countries and price speculation and 
enabling fair prices in the value chain. 

• We want to secure that farmers are able to provide healthy and aff  ord-
able food for all and improve food production by embracing sustain-
able farming and ﬁ shing. Our ﬁ ght for the Green Deal is also a ﬁ ght to 
improve the lives of farmers. 

We fundamentally disagree with the conservatives’ approach that sustain-
ability is the enemy of farmers. 

• Farmers must be supported ﬁ nancially and technically to reach the 
targets to transition to environmentally friendly farming methods. 
• We want to reduce the use of pesticides based on national best prac-

tices, improve soil management, and protect biodiversity.

9. GUARANTEEING SECURITY

We want to ensure safety and security for all citizens. 

• We will improve police and judicial cooperation in the ﬁ ght 
against terrorism, organised crime, drug and arms traffi  cking, 
cyber-crime, money laundering and any form of gender-based 
crimes. 

• Increasing cooperation among European ports is needed to ef-

fectively reduce the inﬂ ux of narcotics into Europe. 

• We will ﬁ ght phone and internet fraud, which especially targets 

older people.

• We want to strengthen Europol, the European Public Prosecu-
tor’s Offi  ce and the future Anti-Money Laundering Authority, 
aiming for a truly European investigation authority that sup-
ports Member States.

10. SOLIDARITY AND DEVELOPMENT ACROSS 
ALL CITIES AND REGIONS

We will keep delivering on an ambitious Cohesion Policy across 
Europe to improve quality of life in cities, rural areas and remote 
regions, and reverse the brain drain. 

• We defend the partnership approach with regional and local 
authorities and their crucial role in shaping and implementing 
Cohesion Policy for upwards social convergence, together with 
civil society. 

They have the most direct impact on the lives of citizens and are 
the drivers of Europe’s rich cultural life and diversity.

• To ensure all citizens enjoy the full beneﬁ ts of EU membership, 
we insist on our call for Romania and Bulgaria to be fully and 
immediately admitted into the Schengen Area.

II.
SOLUTIONS 
FOR OPEN AND 
DEMOCRATIC 
SOCIETIES 

11. DEFEND DEMOCRACY AND 
THE RULE OF LAW

Democracy and the rule of law protect citizens’ rights and ensure 
everyone is treated equally. They are the best defences against 
abuses of power. 

• We defend the rule of law at all levels, with a trustworthy 

justice system, effi  cient anti-corruption measures, and media 
freedom and pluralism. 

• The crucial role of civil society in fostering democracy must be 

supported. 

The far right and populist movements threaten our democratic 
institutions and the rights of women, minorities, vulnerable 
groups, migrants, trade unions and LGBTI communities. We 
condemn conservative and liberal parties that have enabled 
the far right to access power. It is an insult to our values and our 
European history. 

• We want clear rules and sanctions, using all available tools to 
ensure that no EU funding reaches autocratic governments.

12. A FEMINIST EUROPE

We are the party of feminism. We ﬁ ght to ensure that women 
and girls in all their diversity can reach their full potential. 

• Women must be in control of their own lives and bodies with 
free and full access to their sexual and reproductive health 
and rights. 

• The ﬁ ght for gender equality must be reﬂ ected in all policies 

and budgets. 

• We want to close the gender pay, care, and pension gaps by 

2030 with binding measures. 

• We want to increase women’s employment in both quantity 

and quality and ensure a better work-life balance. 

• Following the recent agreement between the European Par-
liament and the Council, we will push for the swift adoption 
of the Directive on gender-based violence and make violence 
against women an EU crime, and we will continue to support 
the “yes means yes” principle.

• We will introduce legislation that safeguards women of all ages 

against sexual harassment and exploitation and push the EU and 
all Member States to fully implement the Istanbul Convention.

13. A EUROPE FREE FROM DISCRIMINATION

There is no room for prejudice in Europe. There must be zero 
tolerance for sexism, racism, antisemitism, Islamophobia, 
LGBTI-phobia, and all forms of discrimination. 

• We will continue and reinforce the EU’s strategies for Gender 

Equality and for LGBTIQ Equality. 

• We will likewise push for the adoption of the European 

Anti-Discrimination Directive and the implementation of 
the EU Strategy on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to 
strengthen political and social rights for all.

14. MANAGING ASYLUM AND MIGRATION 

Migration is a part of European history and of our societies. Citi-
zens of migrant backgrounds actively participate in the economic 
and cultural life of our countries. When properly managed, migra-
tion is an opportunity and a strength. 

• We strive for a common and coordinated system for migration 

and asylum based on solidarity and shared responsibility. 

The Pact on Asylum and Migration ﬁ nally moves the EU away from 
crisis management. Its implementation must result in a fair, safe 
and predictable approach grounded in the respect of human rights 
and people’s dignity, following the EU’s long history of protecting 
people in need. 

• Europe must off er fair and respectful procedures, safe and legal 
pathways, the right to asylum and protection, and humane and 
decent reception conditions that respect our values and laws. 

• We must especially protect and support children and minors, and 

act in their best interests. 

• Legal assistance must be accessible throughout the procedure. 
• For a well-functioning system, return decisions must be carried 

out eff ectively, in a safe and digniﬁ ed manner. 
• We will ﬁ ght against traffi  ckers and smugglers. 
• Sexual violence and exploitation must be severely punished. 
• We will ensure that the EU’s external borders are strengthened, 
managed and controlled eff ectively, while protecting the safety 
and rights of people. 

• We will promote accountable and transparent partnerships with 
countries of origin and transit and stand against any form of EU 
border externalisation. 

• We will never criminalise humanitarian assistance, and we support 
a European mission for search and rescue in the Mediterranean. 
• We stand for inclusive labour market policies, support for local 

authorities and stronger inclusion policies.

15. A EUROPE FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

We need a Europe that works for its young people. Our political family 
will continue making future generations a priority.

• We will empower young people as decision makers, including as 

candidates for election. 

• We will promote all initiatives strengthening the democratic partici-

pation of our youngest citizens. 

• We support the implementation by Member States of the Young 
European Socialists’ demand to lower the voting age to 16 in the 
European elections. 

• We will keep building on the European Youth Guarantee and strive 

for full youth employment. 

• We will ensure that all internships are paid and exploitative practices 
prevented, with the adoption of a Directive on Quality Traineeships in 
the EU, without harming well-functioning national practices. 

• We want a widened Erasmus+ accessible to all and eff ective recogni-

tion of diplomas. 

• We will ﬁ ght so all young people have access to free quality educa-

tion and training, and housing, including through an EU plan against 
the student housing crisis. 

• We want to eradicate child poverty in Europe, strengthen child pro-

tection and fully implement the European Child Guarantee.

16. FOSTERING INTERGENERATIONAL SOLIDARITY 

In our aging societies, we will ﬁ ght for citizens’ rights and participa-
tion, autonomy and wellbeing at all ages. 

• We will defend the rights of seniors – older workers and pensioners 

alike – including healthcare, housing, decent pensions without gender 
bias and age-friendly cities.

• We will push for an EU Strategy on Age Equality to eff ectively pro-

mote the equality of all ages and to ﬁ ght ageism.

17. CONTROLLING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
AND STRENGTHENING ONLINE RIGHTS

The digital transformation of our societies must respect EU funda-
mental values. 

• We will promote better inclusivity via high-speed internet access 
and major investment in digital public infrastructure and digital 
education. 

• We will ensure Europe harnesses the power of AI to protect 

workers and citizens following the “human in control” principle. 

Big Tech’s pursuit of proﬁ t or algorithmic management must never 
be allowed to undermine democracy and workers’ rights. 

• We will implement rules to safeguard our democracies from for-
eign interference, tackle disinformation, safeguard privacy and 
protect everyone from hate speech, online violence and harass-
ment.

• We will ensure that what is illegal offl  ine is illegal online.

III.
SOLUTIONS
FOR A FAIRER 
WORLD 

• We welcome the start of EU membership negotiations with 
Ukraine, Moldova, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we sup-
port the European aspirations of Georgia. 

• We regret that the EU accession process of Turkey has stalled 
for several years because of the Turkish government. In the 
absence of a drastic change of course, the accession process 
cannot be resumed in the current circumstances.

• We will implement an eff  ective enlargement policy, starting 
with the Western Balkans, insisting that all candidate coun-
tries meet all accession criteria. 

Enlargement must go hand in hand with a serious assessment 
of what reforms of the EU architecture are needed, for a more 
effi  cient and democratic Europe that is more transparent and 
closer to its citizens. 

• On this basis, we will use the next parliamentary term to 

strengthen the EU’s capacity to act in an enlarged Union, 
with targeted Treaty changes.

• We need to empower the European Parliament and the Eu-
ropean Commission with tools to safeguard our democracy, 
strengthen our economy, protect our environment and our 
social model.

18. SECURING EUROPE’S PLACE IN THE WORLD

In an increasingly insecure world, the EU must take greater 
responsibility for its own security and defence. 

• We will implement a strong European Common Security and 

Defence Policy that complements NATO. 

Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is a turning point in 
history. It proves that greater collaboration and deeper solidar-
ity is needed to face the new international environment. 

• We support the development of the European defence 

industry through targeted and smarter spending, greater 
joint procurements of defence products, closer cooperation in 
intelligence and further collaboration in cybersecurity and the 
protection of critical infrastructure. 

The EU must speak with one voice in foreign policy matters 
and move towards more majority decisions in certain policy 
matters. To counter foreign interference, the EU must protect 
itself against subversive actions from authoritarian regimes. 

• We need to strengthen the diplomatic and political role of 
the EU on the global scene with a strong European External 
Action Service to defend EU values and interests. 

• The EU must work to resolve longstanding conﬂ icts world-

wide and in Europe, including in Cyprus.

• We maintain our unwavering support for Ukraine, providing 
political, humanitarian, ﬁ nancial and military assistance for 
as long as needed. Our ultimate goals are to support Ukraine 
in restoring its territorial integrity and achieve a just and 
sustainable peace. 

The EU’s enlargement has been a success, bringing democracy, 
prosperity and security. 

19. SUPPORTING PEACE AND FUNDAMENTAL VALUES

We believe in the rules-based multilateral order, centred on a reformed United 
Nations. 

• We will continue promoting the Sustainable Development Goals, peace, de-
mocracy, human rights, a feminist foreign policy, and economic and climate 
justice.

• We will work to end conﬂ ict,  instability, and humanitarian tragedies in the 

Middle East and elsewhere.

• We  support an international peace conference to achieve an equitable two-
state solution between Israelis and Palestinians that respects the rights and 
duties of the two peoples.

• We support initiatives leading towards a sustainable ceaseﬁre.
•  We welcome the EU comprehensive approach to reinitiate the peace 

process between Israel and Palestine and to promote peace in the region. 
Israelis and Palestinians both have the right to live in peace and security.

20. RENEWED INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

The ﬁ rst objective of development policies must be to improve people’s lives in 
our partner countries. Europe must support democratic forces, civil society and 
trade unions in all countries.

• We will further strengthen EU cooperation with the United States and other
democratic allies and build a strong partnership with the United Kingdom.

• We will rebalance our relations with China, promoting our values and protecting

our interests, and further cooperating to address pressing global issues.

• We will build a new partnership of equals with the Global South through a

strong Africa-EU Partnership on social progress, the economy, green energy,
climate change, migration and democracy, a relaunched Euro-Mediterranean
partnership and a new EU-Latin America Progressive Agenda.

• We promote workers’ rights globally with a strong support to the Interna-

tional Labour Organization.

• We will implement an ambitious and fair EU trade agenda that promotes

binding human rights, social, labour, and environmental standards and close
cooperation based on the Sustainable Development Goals.

2024 PES Election Congress, 2 March Rome

PES FULL MEMBER PARTIES, MARCH 2024

This publication received ﬁ nancial support of 
the European Parliament. Sole liability rests with 
the author and the European Parliament is not 
responsible for any use that may be made of the 
information contained therein.

