Electoral 
Moonshot 
Programme

2024-29 Policy Acts

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 

Moonshot Programme  
Introduction 

carbon capture technologies. European citizens and businesses shall actively align their 

behaviours with political targets, creating a groundswell of collective action.

This future cannot be built without solid foundations built on the EU’s strategic 

autonomy. From achieving energy self-sufficiency by 2040 to generating all energy 

domestically through renewable technologies, nuclear, and hydrogen energy. This is our 

aspiration for Europe’s shared green future, with citizens actively participating in a diverse 

and flexible energy mix and energy storage infrastructures capable of achieving a stable 

At the heart of our vision for a renewed European Union (EU) is a transformative journey 

and reliable energy supply.

towards a Federal Europe. We believe that the way the EU functions internally and how it 

projects its global responsibilities externally need a radical evolution.  

First, the EU needs radical democratic change. This evolution is not merely a top-down 

endeavour but a collective effort involving citizens and political leaders across Europe. 

Through this deliberative and participatory process, Europeans will have a European 

Our aspiration towards a renewed green European economy demands a pioneering 

approach to redesigning the EU’s infrastructure, driven by sustainability, resilience, and 

comfort. High-speed rail, efficient public transportation, clean energy, and advanced 

internet connectivity are the bedrock of Europe’s future. Our waste management systems 

must be sustainable, and infrastructure investments must act as bulwarks against the 

Constitution that enshrines their power and rights into a new system that is not only more 

ravages of climate change, creating jobs and fueling economic growth. 

responsive but also more engaging for its citizens.

This democratic revolution will motor into a permanent general citizen’s assembly, 

To meet the challenges Europe faces, we aspire to a renewed economic prosperity, 

one that intertwines seamlessly with environmental sustainability. We redefine growth 

inviting Europeans to actively participate in shaping the future of the EU, and redesigning 

metrics, birthing the ‘Green Net GDP,’ decoupling economic progress from the clutches 

democracy to foster trust, transparency, and collective determination.

We will advocate for a renewed European Parliament, shaped by transnational parties, 

of environmental degradation. Carbon and resource pricing mechanisms steer industries 

toward sustainability, and the generated revenues fuel innovation and the transition to 

a greener economy. A pan-European Social Contract ensures that prosperity is a shared 

holding the power to initiate, amend, and approve legislation, making governance more 

legacy, with citizens actively shaping economic decisions.

reflective of citizens’ interests than Member States’ concerns. Accessible sessions and 

qualified majority voting must replace outdated veto powers, ensuring that decisions align 

A new pan-European Social Contract demands transcending the limitations of the past—a 

with the principles of the European Constitution. In this new Federal Europe, Member 

States can no longer defy EU principles, and the European Court of Justice must wield 

Europe where every citizen is empowered to unleash their full potential, unshackled 

by the constraints of inequality based on social background, disability, race, ethnicity, 

enhanced powers to prevent democratic backsliding, safeguarding the Unions’ integrity.

or religion.  Such efforts must include a fairer and more transparent system against tax 

In our aspirations, Europe’s internal security must be fortified by a federal-level police 

force, that is a reinvigorated Europol ready to combat any threat to the safety of 

evasion and avoidance. Through global cooperation, high transparency, and effective 

enforcement, we must create a progressive and streamlined taxation system. Every 

citizen shall contribute willingly, secure in the knowledge that they are paying their fair 

Europeans. Whether it is (financial) crime, terrorism, or cybersecurity, this revamped force 

share. Our vision is bold, and our mission is clear: to dismantle barriers to success and 

shall stand as a guardian against evolving challenges.

forge a society where fairer wealth distribution and equal opportunities flourish.

Alongside a more democratic and secure Union, the expansion of the European project 

embodies the essence of Europe’s shared peace and prosperity. That is why we believe 

Our journey toward inclusivity commences with a resolute commitment to accessible 

healthcare for all, ensuring a robust foundation for every child. Childhood, in our 

that the EU must embrace new members who share our commitment to democratic values 

aspiration, shall be fostered by inclusive, gender-sensitive, and culturally responsive 

and human rights. Safeguarding against democratic backsliding, we lay the foundation for 

education. Daycare and preschool programs are the catalysts for equalizing opportunities, 

an EU that not only holds itself accountable but actively advocates for justice and equality.

providing unwavering support for children with unique needs. The education system 

This transformation goes beyond rhetoric. The EU’s economy must reach net zero by 2040, 

and secondary education, as well as higher education, are not luxuries but birthrights. 

minimizing greenhouse gas emissions and compensating for the unavoidable through 

Financial means must meet this commitment, paving the way for a society rooted in our 

envisioned as the engine of social mobility, moves us toward a future where primary 

fundamental values.

Volt Europe

2

3

Volt Europe

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 

Our educational paradigm is revolutionary, placing the student at the centre and embracing 

challenge of climate change and climate justice. By consistently engaging with the world, the EU 

interdisciplinary learning and project-based approaches. Education, in our aspiration, goes beyond 

must not only secure its future but pave the way for a stable, low-emission world where global 

the mere acquisition of knowledge—it shapes responsible citizens, instilling democratic thinking, 

warming is confidently projected to stay below 2 degrees by 2040.

media literacy, and critical thought. Across borders, harmonized educational systems foster a 

socially united Europe that celebrates cultural differences and facilitates mobility.

The EU must become a hub for climate-positive projects worldwide, offering long-term, low-interest 

Celebrating diversity in Europe demands treating migrants, and refugees, including climate 

has the responsibility to support global communities in transitioning to sustainable, low-emission 

refugees, with respect, dignity, and compassion. We envision a continent where no one perishes 

pathways, reinforcing its commitment to the Paris Agreement. The only future we must strive for is 

at sea, economic migrants are not criminalized, and those seeking refuge have the right to not 

one of sustainability, resilience, and equity converging for the benefit of all.

loans and stimulating private capital, for the sake of achieving climate justice commitments. The EU 

only belong but also to thrive, provided with essential living conditions, healthcare, employment 

opportunities, and education, including language training. 

We envision a Europe that actively proactively boosts the economies of non-European countries, 

addressing root causes of displacement through durable development cooperation, financial aid, 

Respect and dignity are our compass that drives our aspiration towards robust worker rights, 

and educational programs; dismantles networks of illegal migration, prioritizing the needs of the 

decent living wages, health and safety protections, unionization rights, and flexible working 

victims; and ensures legal pathways for both refugees and migrants that are standardized across all 

arrangements. Whether as workers, entrepreneurs, or freelancers, a comprehensive social safety 

Member States, embracing inclusion, equal burden-sharing, and the free movement of people. Our 

net unfurls, granting the freedom to take risks without the spectre of financial instability. European 

cooperation must be built on democratic values, aiming to reduce poverty, conflict, climate change, 

society must cherish work-life balance, affording ample time for personal pursuits, family, and 

and political instability.

friends.

Addressing these internal challenges only would not bring the necessary radical change for 

and societal resistance demand immediate action. Together, with people—be they Europeans, 

The urgency is clear, and waiting is not an option. Climate change, conflicts, overcrowded camps, 

Europeans to thrive. 

migrants, or refugees—at the centre of our aspirations, we can fashion a future that is thriving 

for all. So, let us stride into this future, fueled by the fire of optimism and the conviction that our 

Our aspiration for Europe transcends mere unity but demands the EU to be a beacon of strength 

actions today will forge a Europe where every dream can flourish and every citizen has boundless 

and influence on the global stage. Picture a future where the European Armed Forces, evolving 

possibilities. The time for action is now, and together, we shall shape a tomorrow that surpasses 

to surpass national boundaries, become a symbol of solidarity and security. Fueled by a shared 

even our most ambitious aspirations.

defence budget and strategic resource management, this transformation does not just secure 

Europeans’ interests; it builds strategic autonomy, all while upholding the principles of democratic 

accountability.

Our aspiration does not stop at securing our borders; it is a blueprint for a future EU foreign policy 

that resonates with coherence and proactivity on a global scale. Imagine a streamlined foreign 

policy decision-making, led by the European Ministry of Foreign Affairs and guided by the European 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, with an elevated role for the European Parliament ensuring rigorous 

democratic oversight. These internal reforms are necessary for the EU to project our aspirations 

onto the international stage, with the EU becoming a major force in multilateral organizations, 

spearheading a reformed United Nations. The EU must act as a global democracy seriously, standing 

as one voice to champion the rights of minorities and the fight for climate justice. Diplomacy and 

economic resources must be used as tools for promoting peace, security, and stability worldwide.

The EU must lead with responsibility, advocating for the vulnerable, and shaping a future where 

unity is not just a concept but a force for positive change on a global scale. It is our internal unity 

and our internal environmental and economic aspirations that will enable the EU to meet the global 

Chief Editors of the Moonshot Program

Claudio Lanza, 

Head of Policy at Volt Europa 

Ines Bravo Figueiredo, 

Head of Policy at Volt Europa

Volt Europe

4

5

Volt Europe

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS

Moonshot Programme
2024-29 Policy Acts

STRONGER EU: EUROPE’S GEOPOLICITAL LEADERSHIP

1. Empowering Europe’s Path to Prosperity  

2. Foreign Affairs and Defence Act  

QUALITY OF LIFE

3. Thriving Together Act 

4. Good Jobs and Shared Prosperity Act 

HUMANE MIGRATION

5. Asylum Seekers and Refugees Act  

6. Labour Migration Act  

MAKING VOTES COUNT

7. Reform the EU Act  

8. European Democracy Act  

LIVEABLE PLANET

9. Climate Transition Act 

10. Healthy Ecosystems Act 

7

20

34

49

59

75

82

92

109

128

1. Empowering 
Europe’s Path 
to Prosperity 

The EU is today the world’s largest economy and biggest trading bloc, thanks to decades of 

economic integration within and outside its borders. This economic powerhouse and its ties to 

the world have enabled significant societal advancement from rising income levels to peace and 

stability, and increased well-being.

While the groundwork of economic cohesion remains crucial, we are in desperate need of an 

upgrade of our framework to master the shortcomings and challenges we are facing today, within 

Europe and across the world. These include the climate crisis, geopolitical vulnerabilities, the 

digital transformation and social polarisation fuelling extremist politics. We must therefore 

create measures that encourage innovation, ensure effective taxation and redirect funds to pay 

into both sustainability and an equitable society within and across countries.

As a progressive movement, we challenge old narratives posing tradeoffs between economic 

growth and inequality or sustainability. Instead, we promote a vision where policies protect, 

provide opportunities, and drive economic progress simultaneously. In order to steer towards 

long-lasting prosperity, our measures of growth must include both planetary boundaries and 

their effects on an equitable and resilient society.  

Likewise, prioritising research and innovation is paramount for nurturing European innovative 

and existing industries while addressing global societal challenges such as climate change, 

digitalization, and health threats. Frameworks for the adoption of innovations such as carbon 

capture technologies or AI, need to be put in place to enable companies of various sizes and 
consumers to benefit from those innovations while ensuring our planetary and social boundaries 

are met (e.g. data protection, energy consumption). 

Our Prosperous Jobs and Wealth Fairness Act complements the current Act, with an array of 

measures that redefine governance and fortify the social safety net for all European citizens on 

our path to shared prosperity.

Our vision is a significant shift in the current economic paradigm, one that supports Europe’s 
transition to sustainable prosperity. Spearheading this shift in Europe to achieve simultaneously 

economic, social and environmental welfare, Europe will continue contributing to spreading 

those developments across continents and thereby strengthen democracies across the world.

Volt Europe

6

7

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  New Economic 
Paradigm

2.  Investing in the Industry 
of the Future 

.

.

Pursue a progressive economic framework 

through an updated GDP indicator that 

includes natural capital accounting, 

encompassing the extraction, depletion, 

and deregulation of natural capital in 

economic activity.

.

.

Increase efforts in European institutions to 

coordinate data collection and usage for 

the creation of more sustainable economic 

indicators. 

Use sustainability and quality-of-life 

indicators as KPIs and inputs for the EU 

 Complement GDP with quality of life 

policy and the application of the European 

indicators and well-being indicators, such 

fiscal rules, the EU budget, and the 

as employment, mental and physical health, 

European Semester processes.

recreation and leisure time.

.

.

Triple the commitment to Horizon Europe 

to make it fit for purpose in funding 

research and innovation programmes that 

tackle climate change, help to achieve the 

UN’s Sustainable Development Goals and 

boost the EU’s competitiveness and growth. 

This will be central to establishing an EU-led 

and pan-European public-private investment 

that benefits all Member States.

Through this programme, we propose to:
.

Increase investment in innovation 

of public goods and state-funded 

services that have been side-lined 

for too long. Health, education, 

cybersecurity, human-centred AI, 

microtechnology, and networks must 

work for all EU citizens and be geared 

towards projects with a clear focus on 

sustainability and green growth.

.

.

.

.

Create innovative and competitive industrial 

clusters instead of a single industrial core, 

following a geographic strategy that allows 

beneficial European infrastructure projects 

to proceed by removing veto power from 

any single Member State.

Establish a full-scale European venture 

program to raise and provide private and 

public risk capital to help bring innovative 

European products and services to the 

global market. This should be administered 

through the European Investment Fund. 

Triple the EU budget to €3 trillion over 

seven years to support this ambitious 

agenda, resorting to new European debt 

and taxes as detailed in the Reform Europe 

Act.

Improve the education and qualification 

.

.

.

Increase funds to support programmes 

of European citizens, as detailed in the 

that improve the digitalisation of our 

Thriving Together Act, as a necessary 

public processes and functions, as we 

condition for this investment.

detail in the Thriving Together Act.

Develop research in critical and 

underdeveloped sustainability areas as 

detailed in the Climate Transition Act 

and Healthy Ecosystems Act.

Create a European defence Industrial 

base to support the creation of an 

effective European Armed Forces, as 

we advocate in the Foreign Affairs and 

Defence Act.

8

9

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP 
 
3. Green Economy

4. Responsible Digital 
Transformation

.

.

Implement carbon pricing that is 

mainstreamed to all sectors of the economy 

with revenues redirected towards green 

investments, as detailed in the Climate 

Transition Act.

Introduce regulatory standards to ban 

.

.

Extend the 20% target to produce 

semiconductors in the EU by 2030 to 

electrolysers, inverters, batteries and 

critical components for solar panels and 

wind turbines.

Ensure the availability of raw materials and 

planned obsolescence, promote circular 

extend the Critical Raw Materials Act to 

practices and reduce material footprint.

include compulsory licensing for exporting 

critical resources.

.

.

.

.

Continuously research technologies and the 

manufacturer’s supply chain) in product 

impact of current legislation, to create new 

specifications.

legislation that facilitates the evolution of 

digital technology in a way that upholds 

European values and creates industries of 

the future in Europe, focussing on seven 

principles:

Ensuring the safety and security of users 

of digital technology, for example, by 

ensuring that all organisations within the 

EU assess their exposure to the impact of 

quantum computing and create a migration 

plan to post-quantum cryptographic 

protocols where necessary. Similarly, e.g., 

communicating annually to the public the 

security posture of critical infrastructure.

Fostering open-source and accessible 

technology, for example, increasing access 

of EU institutions and industries to open-

source software, by avoiding legislation 

.

.

.

.

Ensuring that current and new technology 

does not violate fundamental rights and 

freedoms, for example, by requiring 

mandatory audits of AI systems so that 

they don’t infringe on privacy or produce 

discriminatory effects.

Supporting entrepreneurs to fit into 

the regulatory framework of the EU. In 

particular, creating regulatory sandboxes 

and including funding for technological 

compliance in existing and forthcoming EU 

funding programmes.

Ensuring that digital technologies are taxed 

fairly, based on where the digital product’s 

revenue is generated.

Strengthening EU frameworks to ensure 

that hinders open-source contributions or 

that providers operating in Europe future-

threatens net neutrality and ensuring that 

proof their emerging and disruptive 

everyone in Europe gets access to new 

technologies. Future-proofing is especially 

technologies.

important in the current global Industrial 

Revolution 4.0 and is an enabler for the 

Advancing sustainable and long-lasting 

EU to promote its values in international 

technology, for example, by strengthening 

dialogue.

the ‘right to repair’ so that anyone who 

wants to repair their product themselves 

has access to affordable spare parts and 

repair information. Similarly, e.g., requiring 

manufacturers to publish the ecological 

footprint of products (including the 

10

11

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP5. Institutionalise our European 
Investment Schemes

6. A deeply integrated 
European market

.

.

Make the Resilience and Recovery Facility, 

.

Put in place rules that prevent the use of 

which is the largest EU program that 

European taxpayer-funded investment 

promotes economic development and social 

programs in importing from outside the 

and environmental goals, a permanent 

EEA goods and services that have critical 

element of the negotiations on the next 

strategic importance for the economic 

multiannual financial framework. Focus 

autonomy of the EU. Such imports create 

on the strategic autonomy of the EU by 

reliance on foreign goods and services, 

strengthening our supply chains and 

which contradicts our desired goal of 

subsidising the reshoring of critical goods 

enhanced strategic autonomy. 

and inputs.

Extend and strengthen programs that 

provide support for small and medium-sized 

enterprises, such as InvestEU, especially 

those showing innovative business models 

and providing critical goods. In selecting 

investments, consider how to strengthen 

.

.

Introduce a Small Business Act for Europe 

which reserves 25% of public contracts on 

EU and national level for European SMEs 

and validates legislation and requirements 

on both levels not to be harmful to SMEs.

Simplify the public procurement process 

areas that have been affected by 

and reporting requirements for SMEs.

outmigration (“brain drain”) to counteract 

the core-periphery status quo of the 

European economy.

.

.

.

Champion European market integration, 

.

Further develop our capital markets for 

especially that of financial markets, by 

both debt and equity financing and saving, 

ensuring that entrepreneurs in Eastern 

especially for our small and medium-sized 

Europe have the same financing potential as 

companies, and make it easier to raise 

those in Western Europe.

capital via alternative financial instruments, 

such as crowdfunding and peer-to-peer 

Complete the Banking and Capital Markets 

lending.

Union and introduce European deposit 

insurance and sovereign bond-backed 

.

Strengthen corporate governance standards 

securities to provide safer assets to banks 

to reduce the risk of mismanagement, 

for backing safe deposits, thus supporting 

fraud, and excessive speculation, through a 

the continuous harmonisation and 

fair tax system. Raise capital requirements 

integration of European supervision and 

for banks to avoid the need for excessive 

regulation.

taxpayer subsidies to banks.

Progress towards backing European safe 

assets by sovereign debt issued by the EU 

and backed by European debt and taxes. 

12

13

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP7. Trade, Sustainability 
and Human Rights

8.  Protecting Critical 
Infrastructure 

.

.

Embed obligatory human rights and 

.

Trade deals must take into account the 

ecological sustainability into all trade 

economic realities in third countries and be 

agreements and review agreements or stop 

to the benefit of both parties

negotiations if consistent violations are 

identified.

Take measures to monitor and identify 

products made with forced labour and 

prevent them from entering the EU market.

.

.

Grant the EU the right to prevent FDI 

into the European economy or the use 

of foreign-produced parts in critical 

infrastructure if it concludes that these 

pose a security risk, thus ensuring that the 

EU retains the necessary autonomy.

Grant the EU the right to purchase any asset 

directly that is to be sold to a foreign buyer, 

if such sale would pose a security risk.

.

.

.

Promote a broad definition of European 

critical infrastructure, including 

transportation systems, waste & water 

infrastructure, healthcare and public 

health services, energy grids, harbours, 

airports, nuclear power plants, digital 

communication networks, data centres, 

network cables, arable land and chemical 

facilities.

Prioritise investment in critical Pan-

European infrastructure projects, including 

a renewed commitment to the Trans-

European Transport Networks (TEN-T) by 

doubling the Connecting Europe Facility 

(CEF) funding instrument

Allow the EU to prevent potentially 

dangerous foreign direct investment 

(FDI) in critical infrastructure by creating 

consistent FDI screening mechanisms across 

Member States.

14

15

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP9. Secure and Competitive 
Payments and Financial 
Services 

.

.

.

.

Introduce measures that give EU citizens 

and companies secure and affordable 

options for payments and digital financial 

services, avoiding market dominance by a 

few players that charge high transaction 

fees:

Ensure competition in the market for 

.

.

Introduce a digital Euro as a useful medium 

of payment for the unbanked, creating 

competitive pressure in the market for 

deposits and payments. This should not 

have any holding limits and include salary 

payments. 

Safeguard the position of cash as legal 

consumer financial services and incentivise 

tender in our society, but limit real estate 

the adoption of useful financial technology 

transactions in cash to prevent money 

products, such as non-exclusive card 

laundering. 

payments or instant bank transfers. 

Initiate antitrust proceedings in cases 

where the market is captured by a small 

number of dominant firms.

Consider the establishment of a European 

public payment processing corporation, if 

the large American payment processing 

firms are found to use a dominant market 

position to charge excessive fees. 

10. Fighting tax evasion 
and avoidance 

.

Combat tax evasion and avoidance, 

the private and corporate wealth resides. 

which are rampant in the EU due to tax 

By improving the flow of information 

competition between Member States that 

between national authorities we can better 

often allows large international firms to 

understand wealth inequality, fight tax 

evade taxes, while small and medium-sized 

evasion, and stop the flow of illicit money 

enterprises pay their fair share:

from abroad into Europe.

.

.

.

Harmonise corporate taxation by using 

a Common Consolidated Corporate 

Tax Base in the EU and introduce 

formulary apportionment of profits of 

multinational corporations.

Mandate a minimum effective 

corporate tax rate of at least 22% 

and introduce obligatory national 

top-up taxes for profits from lower 

tax jurisdictions to effectively reach 

at least 22%. Furthermore, allow 

optional national top-up taxes up to 

the domestic tax rate.

Facilitate the automatic and 

mandatory exchange of information 

between all EU Member States, with 

the new EU Ministry of Finance as a 

coordinating institution, as proposed 

in the Reform the EU Act.

.

We want Europe to effectively fight 

tax evasion and illicit money flows but 

.

.

.

.

Implement a central wealth register 

by merging data from various 

sources, such as national tax and 

real estate register data. Grant this 

responsibility to the EU Ministry of 

Finance, proposed in the Reform the 

EU Act, allowing it to close the current 

informational gap on the distribution 

and geography of wealth.

Create mechanisms to exchange data 

with other such registers worldwide, 

especially regarding information 

about offshore tax havens. European 

data protection standards have to be 

ensured in such exchanges.

Allow the Ministry of Finance to 

negotiate agreements for the mutual 

sharing of such data with the clearing 

houses in international financial 

centres.

Enforce the EU rules on the obligation 

policymakers’ available information about 

of establishing beneficial ownership 

the distribution and geography of wealth 

registers, so that real estate investors 

is very limited. We do not have an overview 

can no longer hide behind anonymous 

of where, in Europe or offshore, much of 

front companies. 

16

17

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP 
 
 
 
How we will pursue this act 
in the European Parliament

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The “Empowering Europe’s Path to Prosperity” 

proposed by the Commission are necessary, 

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

Act requires major and minor changes to the 

including Regulation (EU) 2023/1781 (Chips 

the implementation costs and the annual 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

existing European Union legal framework. 

Act), the Critical Raw Materials Act (not yet 

costs for five years, is € 316.364.000.000.  The 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

Some proposed reforms would likely require 

adopted), or the Net Zero Industry Act (not 

implementation costs are €308.646.500.000 

running of the proposed policies. 

amendments to the Treaties such as, for 

yet adopted). Likewise, Volt’s policies aiming 

and the annual costs are € 1.543.500.000.

example, the use of new indicators for the 

at the completion of the Banking and Capital 

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

application of European Union budget rules 

Markets Union require the adoption of new 

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

which would entail an amendment of Articles 

secondary legislation in this area, without 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

total income.

121 and 126 TFEU, and of Protocol 12 of the 

Treaty change. Furthermore, to facilitate the 

Treaty. Similarly, some of the measures aimed 

exchange of information between Member 

at granting the Commission more powers 

States the introduction of new secondary 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

in the sphere of national security to protect 

legislation, potentially amending existing 

campaigns.

critical infrastructures require Treaty change, 

instruments such as Council Directive 2011/16/

as national security remains a sphere of 

EU on administrative cooperation in the field 

competence of the Member States. Moreover, a 

of taxation, is necessary. In addition, new 

European safe asset backed by sovereign debt 

investments as mentioned by the Act require 

issued by the European Union and European 

an agreement of Member States over the 

debt and taxes are likely to require Treaty 

increase of the EU budget in the context of 

change.

the multiannual financial framework. Lastly, 

the “Institutionalise our Investment Schemes” 

Further policies that Volt proposes need less 

pillar will require an amendment of Directive 

far-reaching amendments to existing legislative 

2014/24/EU on public procurement.

or administrative instruments. For instance, 

to realise the measures aimed at fostering the 

Green Economy new legislative instruments 

and amendments to secondary law in force or 

18

19

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP2. Foreign Affairs 
and Defence Act 

More than a decade ago, the European Union won the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition 

of its successful prevention of war among its members following two devastating World 

Wars. However, in 2022, war erupted again on the European continent, as Russia attacked 

Ukraine. The lesson is that achieving peace in Europe cannot only be done by looking 

inward, as freedom must be better armed than tyranny. Europe must take responsibility 

for its broader horizon. Across the globe, China has emerged as a systemic rival, and even 

the United States has displayed inconsistency as a reliable partner. Global and European 

challenges continue to surge. Meanwhile, individual EU member states’ influence in the 

international system has decreased, while the famous question ‘’Who do I call if I want to 

speak to Europe’’ remains as relevant as ever. Volt is committed to turning the EU into a 

strong pillar of a reformed multilateral system which speaks with one voice on the world’s 

stage.

The EU has the means to become a powerful, self-reliant, and positive global actor. A 

history of multilateral leadership, transformative enlargement rounds, and a globally 

competitive defence industrial base provide solid ground for more ambitious policies. A 

majority of European residents and citizens want to see the EU play a stronger role in their 

defence and representation, which would lead to greater security, diversity and prosperity 

for all its residents. This is why the EU should establish its Armed Forces equipped with a 

strong and unified defence industrial base. However, real strength can only come through 

awareness and taking responsibility. The EU should develop a progressive foreign policy 

culture that is self-reflective of its own historical legacies and public perceptions in other 

parts of the world. Through progressive trade and development policies, we will also build 

a more positive, attractive and horizontal relationship with the global majority.

To stand on solid footing in the world, the EU must also improve its societal resilience 

to hybrid threats against our economies, citizens and democracies, and improve security 

through civic participation. Many millions of people find inspiration in the EU and see it as 

their common future. Volt is committed to welcoming new Member States with open arms, 

to amplify its global sway and to advance the peaceful unification of Europe. A reformed 

and enlarged EU will foster stability on our continent and build our global influence to 

ultimately shape a more equitable, effective and legitimate multilateral system for all.

20

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP

1.  One voice for the 
EU in the world

.

.

.

Restructure the European External Action 

collaboration. Additionally, the 

Service (EEAS) by evolving the European 

External Action Service (EEAS) into the 

EUMFA will develop an EU space 

strategy, enable cooperation on 

European Union Ministry of Foreign 

space exploration and lead the way 

Affairs (EUMFA). This transformation will 

towards establishing an international 

streamline and optimise the EU’s foreign 

framework within the UN for 

affairs apparatus to enhance its efficiency, 

collaboration in the civil exploration 

effectiveness, and global influence.

and peaceful use of the Moon, Mars, 

Divide the Role of the High Representative 

of the EU for Foreign Affairs and Security 

Policy (HRVP) into two distinct positions: 

an EU Minister of Foreign Affairs and 

an EU Minister of Defence. This division 

of responsibilities will bring about 

specialisation and focused leadership in 

their respective domains.

The newly established EUMFA, through the 

democratic mandate of a majority-elected 

European Government, will become the 

sole representative for the EU’s commonly 

formulated foreign policy position and its 

exercise in diplomacy, including bilateral 

and multilateral negotiations. The current 

setup needs to be more cohesive, thus more 

transparent, effective and consistent. The 

and other astronomical objects.

Cultivate a Common Diplomatic Culture 

both at the national and EUMFA levels, 

expanding the EU staff proportionally to 

seconded national staff and mandating 

the participation of all EU diplomatic staff 

(both national and EUMFA) in the European 

Diplomatic Academy and its training 

programs. 

Enhance Consular Services with the 

EUMFA manages bilateral representation 

and consular services for all EU Member 

States in third countries with no national 

diplomatic presence for those Member 

States. 

Create a proper Joint Intelligence Analysis 

.

.

.

EUMFA mandate will focus on the following 

Branch by empowering the EU Intelligence 

key missions:

and Situation Centre (EU INTCEN) with the 

ability to collate and process intelligence 

.

.

Carry on political diplomacy. Thus, the 

gathered by member states and EUMFA 

EUMFA will be the EU’s representative 

delegations. It will also establish its 

on international cooperation, 

intelligence-gathering capabilities, under 

human rights, international justice, 

effective parliamentary and judicial scrutiny 

neighbourhood and enlargement, and 

to ensure compliance with human rights. EU 

humanitarian assistance.

INTCEN analyses will inform the decision-

making processes of joint EU foreign and 

Carry on science diplomacy. The 

security policies, including the identification 

EUMFA will notably support and 

of collective security threats and priorities.

promote climate and global health 

21
21

Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPVolt Europe 
2. A progressive foreign 
policy culture

3. A Vision for a Wider, Stronger 
and More Inclusive Union

.

Build a strong conscience for colonial and 

.

Integrate Feminist Foreign Policy (FFP) 

imperial legacies of Member States in 

within the EUMFA and Member States’ 

third countries in the European diplomatic 

Ministries of Foreign Affairs. Internally, this 

corps that is reflected in the EU’s 

will necessitate ensuring equal participation 

diplomacy towards these third countries 

of women and other inter-sectionally 

by creating diverse and unified diplomatic 

disadvantaged groups within the EU’s 

representation, embodying a European 

diplomatic service, encompassing leadership 

voice. Highlight different backgrounds in 

roles. Externally, the EU will encourage 

Europe when building a structural dialogue 

equal participation in negotiations 

with third countries based on equality and 

and peace agreements involving other 

respect, aiming to move away from past 

international actors. EU delegations to 

paternalistic and exploitative legacies and 

international negotiations will be composed 

combat resentment.

of FFP principles.

.

.

Introduce a new enlargement methodology 

sectoral focuses and levels of engagement. 

centred on gradual integration into the 

EU enlargement should be a merit-based 

EU through stages, replacing the current 

and open-door policy.

‘’all or nothing’’ approach with a more 

efficient, transparent and fairer process.  

.

Provide Special Support for Nations 

As candidate countries make progress in 

Facing Foreign Aggression by developing 

implementing reforms to align with the EU 

a clear pre-prepared toolbox of options 

acquis, they will progressively gain greater 

to provide support for countries seeking 

access to EU resources like the EU budget 

EU membership who are under hybrid 

and participation in EU institutions. These 

or conventional threats with specific 

stages will be reversible in case of reform 

instruments to protect their sovereignty 

setbacks. The European Government 

and territorial integrity, societal resilience 

(formerly the Commission) will monitor this 

and consistency of their EU accession 

process through quantified assessments, 

pathway. Additionally, provides special 

replacing the current qualitative method. 

long-term political, financial, and military 

Candidate countries must be able to 

commitments from the EU to protect 

understand the process and the evaluation 

Ukraine and secure its path towards EU 

of their progress fully and have means to 

accession. Financial assets seized through 

appeal for scrutinization of decisions. The 

sanctions against Russia will be used to 

new system will accelerate the accession 

finance such aid, accession reforms and 

timelines of candidates through new 

reconstruction.

incentives for reforms which will counter 

‘’enlargement fatigue’’ while improving 

.

Reform the EU to make it ready for 

the flexibility of the EU’s own ‘’absorption 

enlargement most importantly, decision-

capacity’’.

making procedures that currently require 

unanimity in the Council must be replaced 

Aligning EU enlargement with other 

with qualified majority voting (QMV) to 

non-EU organisations by making the new 

avoid blockades by single Member State 

staged enlargement complementary with 

vetoes. Furthermore, the EU’s budget must 

membership of other frameworks such as 

be reformed to reflect the financial needs 

the European Political Community (EPC) and 

of an enlarged EU. The EU reform Volt 

the Council of Europe. Membership of such 

envisions is detailed in our Reform the EU 

organisations should not be an alternative 

Act (Chapter 7).

to EU membership for aspiring candidates, 

but be complementary in terms of different 

22

23

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP4. Reducing the global 
North-South economic divide

5. An autonomous military 
& civil defence capability

.

.

Together, the 27 member countries 

rights. Faced with these two models which 

and institutions of the European Union 

have shown their limits and dangers, the 

contribute $115 billion to Official 

EU can play a leading role in developing 

Development Assistance (ODA), according 

and promoting a “Strasbourg consensus” 

to the 2022 OECD figures, double the 

in multilateral institutions, based on the 

amount of American aid. Currently, each 

following principles:

member country manages its ODA effort 

within a national framework, according 

to its own geographic and thematic 

priorities. To strengthen their effectiveness, 

coherence and visibility, Volt proposes 

that funding and public development aid 

mechanisms be grouped at the European 

level within the framework of a “European 

Development Agency” with ad hoc financial 

and human resources and institutional 

arrangements. This transfer would give 

the EU a unique capacity to contribute 

to the achievement of the Sustainable 

Development Goals and an enhanced soft 

power capacity. 

The “Washington consensus” served until 

recently as a doctrine for the World Bank 

and the IMF which, in return for their loans, 

imposed on developing countries policies of 

liberalisation of public services and opening 

of their economies with effects sometimes 

catastrophic. For their part, China and its 

.

.

.

.

A renegotiation of the debt of the 

least developed countries within 

the framework of the Paris Club 

(60 countries are in a state of debt 

distress).

The introduction of a new clause in 

loan contracts signed by developing 

countries automatically suspends their 

repayment in the event of a large-scale 

natural disaster.

An overhaul of the governance of 

international institutions, in particular, 

the recruitment of leaders of the 

World Bank and the IMF based on 

skills, and greater participation of 

representatives of civil society and 

NGOs in the governance bodies of 

these institutions.

.

.

.

Reform and merge the EDA and the 

.

In the medium term, develop joint EU 

defence-industrial elements of the 

military capabilities by ensuring the Rapid 

European Commission (e.g. DG DEFIS) 

Deployment Capacity (RDC) is ready for 

into a European Ministry of Defence 

deployment by 2025, and further expanding 

(EUMD) creating a centralised institution 

it by adding more mission profiles, 

responsible for overseeing European 

providing it with standing and harmonised 

defence efforts, including strategy, 

equipment and EU staff. In addition, the 

operations, research, procurement, and the 

EU should create a standing European 

Defence Technological and Industrial Base.

Response Force (ERF) of 60,000 personnel 

equipped with the highest spectrum of 

Establish a European Military Headquarters 

land, air, naval and space assets. Its core 

(EMHQ) responsible for drafting strategy 

purpose is as an initial intervention force 

and making key operational decisions 

to respond to threats to EU territorial 

regarding the operations of EU military 

integrity, complementing national 

units, particularly the RDC and ERF. It will 

militaries. This capability will be available 

operate under the EUMD and should be 

with priority for the EU, and second priority 

supported by a European Military Academy 

for NATO. The EMA will train the personnel 

(EMA) which will educate, train and 

of the RDC and ERF.

exchange a generation of personnel with a 

joint military culture.

.

Establish immediate EU joint military 

capabilities amongst a coalition of the 

In the short term, reinforce regional 

willing by creating an agreement accessible 

specialisation in specific branches (e.g. 

to all EU members that constitutes a 

air, land, sea) and capabilities (e.g. 

steering committee, with the necessary 

cyber, amphibious, air assault). This 

powers, which can establish integrated EU 

will incentivise the development of 

military units, where decisions are taken 

comparative advantages and increase the 

by a qualified majority and in coordination 

cost-effectiveness and interoperability of 

with NATO. Such units will be put under 

Negotiated conditionalities, linked 

EU militaries. At the same time, encourage 

the authority of the reformed European 

allies have developed a “Beijing consensus”, 

to the fight against corruption, 

and standardise best practices on regional 

Government as specified in Act 7. This will 

which emphasises the financing of 

respect for the rights of minorities, 

integration of national units at the 

be a more rapid initial step towards the 

infrastructure, without any consideration 

and policies for the promotion and 

operational level, e.g. on the example of  

long-term EU-wide integration of armed 

of the excessive debt over the beneficiary 

protection of women.

countries, nor of the essential principles of 

good governance and respect for human 

Franco-German and Dutch-German units. 

forces, reflecting the urgency of the 

This will contribute to a shared military 

immediate need for an autonomous EU 

culture and operational effectiveness.

military capability amongst willing member 

24

states.

25

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP.

.

.

Expand the European Solidarity Corps into 

an ambitious voluntary EU civil and military 

service programme funded by the EU and 

complementary to existing national military 

and/or civil public services.

Create grassroots Initiatives for Resilience 

through a program aimed at supporting and 

financing grassroots initiatives dedicated 

to digital and civic resilience against hybrid 

threats. These initiatives will counteract 

activities such as election interference 

campaigns conducted by “troll factories” 

from third countries.

Create a European civil and military branch 

for disaster intervention expanding RescEU 

in scope and powers, modelled after the 

Spanish Unidad Militar de Emergencias 

and the German Technisches Hilfwerk, that 

intervenes in all types of man-made and 

natural disasters and catastrophes. We 

need to create the competencies in our 

societies to adapt to climate change and 

conflicts and a European military branch 

with civil society institutions across the 

Union would allow to building of “brand 

equity” for the European Armed Forces and 

distinguish the EU from other geopolitical 

actors by carrying a positive and defence-

oriented messaging.

6. Advancing the EU’s Defence 
Industrial Strategic Autonomy 

.

.

.

Empower the EU Ministry of Defence 

in the next budget cycle, receiving at least 

to identify military capability needs and 

6% of the EU budget. Additionally, it will 

procure research, development, and supply 

establish a new target, requiring at least 

of these capabilities in competitive tenders. 

60% of all defence spending by Member 

Procurement shall equip the European 

States to be allocated to collaborative 

armed forces with state-of-the-art military 

projects.

capabilities. To the extent that this primary 

objective is met, procurement should 

.

Integrate the EU Defence Industry into 

consider fostering economic development 

the Internal Market phasing out national 

in economically underdeveloped regions of 

industrial protectionism and creating 

the EU. 

substantial economies of scale. It will be 

compensated by creating EU-regional 

Radically increase the EU’s position as a 

defence industrial hubs (industries, 

global defence innovator by transforming it 

education etc.) around leading countries, 

into a driving force for the development of 

with participation from SMEs and 

emerging and disruptive strategic defence 

companies in smaller neighbouring Member 

technologies. Existing efforts such as the 

States. 

EU Defence Innovation Scheme (EUDIS) and 

the Hub for EU Defence Innovation (HEDI) 

.

Develop Precise Common Rules for Arms 

should be consolidated, and their mandate 

Exports and ensure their strict and coherent 

and funding increased. This initiative should 

enforcement for EU defence companies 

focus on capability areas where the EU can 

operating outside of the EU.

achieve global competitiveness, such as the 

development of cyber, artificial intelligence, 

carbon-neutral (e.g. green hydrogen), 

quantum computing, and space defence 

technologies.

Consolidate EU Defence Funding (EDF) 

Instruments by merging existing separate 

EU funding instruments related to joint 

defence initiatives, including research and 

development and procurement. The EDF 

will become a permanent component of 

the Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 

26

27

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP7. A European pillar for NATO 
and an integrated democratic 
world

.

.

.

Establish an EU-NATO Strategic 

dependency minimisation on e.g. emerging 

Coordination Group, that is, a political 

technologies (AI, quantum computing), 

steering body to facilitate structured, 

critical rare earth mineral value chains and 

long-term cooperation between both 

semiconductors. On the example of the 

entities. The Group will develop a Joint 

EU-US Trade and Technology Council (TTC) 

Strategic Document, outlining shared 

and the sustainable steel and aluminium 

priorities, threat perceptions, capability 

club, institutionalise and deepen such 

requirements, force availability, and areas 

efforts. Such efforts should help build a 

of specialisation (such as territorial defence 

transatlantic ‘’Brussels Effect’’.

VS hybrid resilience). It will also delineate 

regional and thematic roles, particularly 

.

Develop a broader strategy for deeper 

concerning role divisions in Europe and 

engagement with other countries which 

the Indo-Pacific and address emerging and 

share political norms, values and interests 

disruptive technologies critical to defence. 

with the EU and NATO, including candidate 

Complementarity between Article 5 of 

countries for both, major non-NATO allies 

NATO and Article 42.7 of the EU should also 

and regional organisations. This voluntary 

be clarified and planned for.

cooperation should include efforts to 

increase mutual deterrence, societal 

Continuing the task force on the resilience 

resilience, and political cooperation to 

of critical infrastructure by taking concrete 

strengthen the unity of democracies. 

steps to ensure the effectiveness and 

The Summit for Democracy should be 

resilience of critical infrastructure for the 

institutionalised as a forum for coordination 

Euro-Atlantic military supply chain network, 

with clear membership criteria and an open-

including submarine communications 

door policy.

cables and infrastructure critical for energy 

supply and military mobility. EU and NATO 

candidates should also be included.

Increasing interdependence and therefore 

minimising risks of transatlantic political 

fallouts through joint integration on 

non-military initiatives. This would 

relate particularly to market integration, 

regulatory standard setting and strategic 

8. Ensuring a Comprehensive 
Strategic Deterrent 

.

.

.

.

Promote the global prohibition of nuclear 

weapons, supporting the Treaty on the 

Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) 

as a long-term strategy for global nuclear 

disarmament, conditional on its alignment 

with the fundamental necessity of 

maintaining a credible strategic deterrent, 

should the need persist.

.

.

Establish a Conventional Strike Capability 

to provide a broader range of options 

along the escalation ladder, minimising the 

reliance on nuclear deterrence whenever 

possible.

Adopt a whole-of-government approach 

to ensure EU resilience in times of peace, 

conflict and war, as well as in the “grey 

Reduce global stocks of nuclear weapons, 

zone” between peace, conflict and war. 

reflected both in the deployed warheads, 

Current EU policies focus primarily on 

and the retired/reserve ones. This would 

promoting resilience as a framework to 

mitigate the verifiability problem, reduce 

counter hybrid threats. Although this 

the risk of human error leading to a 

framework is valid, the EU must craft 

(large-scale) nuclear strike and improve 

specific policies and measures to put this 

supervision effectiveness while reducing 

framework into practice effectively.

the risk of diversion.

.

Integrate existing instruments (Cyber 

Transfer of Control of the French nuclear 

Diplomacy Toolbox, EU Hybrid Threats 

deterrent under the political authority of 

framework) to create a Hybrid Threats 

the European Government following the 

doctrine. That doctrine will build upon the 

adoption of a European Constitution and 

Council of Europe’s Helsinki approach to 

the establishment of fully democratic and 

mainstream a unified EU hybrid threats 

accountable federal institutions. Over time, 

taxonomy and risk assessment. The first 

its personnel, systems, and procedures 

instalment of this framework will be cyber-

will be fully integrated into European 

resilience under the Cyber Solidarity Act.

structures.

.

Empower the EU INTCEN to lead and 

Develop a Strategic Defence system, 

implement the doctrine while creating 

capable of effectively countering aerial 

a legal framework for intelligence 

threats to EU territory, including the 

sharing across the MS. The EU INTCEN 

capacity to respond to limited (ballistic) 

will thus facilitate rapid and effective 

nuclear attacks.

countermeasures and develop 

recommendations for improving joint civil-

military planning for hybrid contingencies. 

28

29

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPThe first instalment of the capability will 

be on cyber-resilience under the Cyber 

Solidarity Act. Capability development 

will also focus on facilitating processes of 

public-private continuity management in 

critical infrastructures.

.

Define a threshold of cumulative or non-

cumulative hybrid threats where the mutual 

defence clause (Art. 42(7) TEU) may be 

invoked and define the means of response 

that are authorised (conventional, non-

conventional). In addition, the relevant 

bodies will clarify the division of labour 

about attributing and countering hybrid 

threats between Integrated Political Crisis 

Response (IPCR) arrangements, the Hybrid 

Fusion Cell within the EU INTCEN and 

the EUMFA (DG DEFIS, EEAS during the 

transition period).

9. Championing a Reformed 
Multilateral System

.

.

.

.

Adopt a Comprehensive Pandemic 

permanent members. The UNPA should 

Accord, implementing a robust 

adopt a representative voting system, 

pandemic prevention, preparedness, and 

taking into consideration the population 

response framework with a mandate for 

size of the Member States.

comprehensive information gathering. 

Special attention will be devoted to 

.

Reform the UNSC, In the short term, 

bridging the health capacity gap in 

by adding additional permanent UNSC 

developing nations.

members and transferring the French 

permanent UNSC seat to an EU seat. In 

Restructure the Global Financial System, 

the long term, by abolishing permanent 

promoting inclusivity and fairness within 

seats and instituting a regular election 

the global financial system, mainly to 

for UNSC seats by the General Assembly 

effectively address climate financing for 

(later the UNPA) from a pool of regional 

developing countries. Initiatives like the 

groupings. The UNSC should increase the 

Paris Summit for a New Global Financing 

total number of seats to better reflect 

Pact will be integral. The ratification of a 

regional, economic, and population 

global minimum corporate tax rate will be 

diversity, including by granting seats 

expedited.

to regional organisations. In addition, 

Qualified Majority Voting should replace 

Establish New Own Resources for the UN, 

unanimity for matters related to genocide, 

creating financial mechanisms such as a 

crimes against humanity, or war crimes, 

Global Resources Dividend (GRD) or Tobin 

including resolutions legitimizing military 

Tax to fund and incentivize transitions 

interventions

aligned with the Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs) and distribute the financial 

burden at the UN more equitably.

Support a United Nations Parliamentary 

Assembly (UNPA), to strengthen the 

UN’s democratic legitimacy and create a 

precedent for representative democracy 

at the UN level which could be further 

expanded in its mandate and scope in 

the future, including overriding vetoes by 

United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 

30

Volt Europe
Volt Europe

31
31
31

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPHow we will Pursue this Act in 
the European Parliament

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The Union’s Common Foreign and Security 

suggested, including, inter alia, Title III of the 

Policy (CFSP) is based, inter alia, on Articles 21-

TEU “provision on the institutions”, Title V of 

46 of the TEU as well as Articles 205-222 of the 

the TEU “general provisions on the Union’s 

TFEU. In the field of CFSP, the EU is currently 

External Action and specific provision on the 

vested with special legislative competencies 

common foreign and security policy”, Title V 

which include specific institutional features, 

of the TFEU on “international agreements’’ 

such as the limited participation of the 

as well as the Declaration concerning the 

European Parliament in the decision-making 

common foreign and security policy. In addition, 

procedure. CFSP is currently defined and 

subsequent legislation including binding legal 

implemented by the European Council as well 

acts such as a Decision are required to establish 

as the Council of the European Union. 

and further define the role of the Ministers. 

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 447.460.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 49.626.000.000 and 

the annual costs are € 199.330.000.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

Furthermore, Volt strives to advance the 

campaigns.

To implement the policies of the Act, there is a 

EU’s defence industrial strategic autonomy 

legal need for Treaty changes. These changes 

by enhancing the EU’s position as a global 

include the establishment of shared legislative 

defence innovator. To consolidate and enhance 

competencies to allow the Union to introduce 

efforts such as the EU Defence Innovation 

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

common standards by law. Policies such as 

Scheme (EUDIS) and the Hub for EU Defence 

running of the proposed policies.

“one voice for the EU in the world’’ require 

Innovation (HEDI) there is a need for change 

a broad rethinking of the existing legislative 

and update of the existing secondary law, such 

framework. This includes the restructuring of 

as Regulation (EU) 2021/697 establishing the 

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

the European External Action Service (EEAS) 

European Defence Fund. Moreover, policies 

total income.

into a European Union Ministry of Foreign 

strengthening and innovating the role of the 

Affairs (EUMFA) as well as the division of the 

Union in the global context require advocating 

role of the High Representative of the EU for 

principles such as feminist foreign policies 

Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (HRVP) 

within the existing framework of NATO and the 

into two positions, namely an EU Minister of 

United Nations as well as in new bilateral and 

Foreign Affairs and an EU Minister of Defence. 

multilateral agreements.

To realise this policy, Treaty changes are 

32

33

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSSTRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIPEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS STRONGER EU: EUROPE‘S GEOPOLITICAL LEADERSHIP3. Thriving 
Together Act

Europe prides itself on being a region of openness, democracy and freedom. It enjoys some of the highest 

levels of prosperity and abundance in the world. Yet, despite progress, it remains a continent divided. Millions 

of people are sidelined or excluded from the opportunities they need to build the lives they deserve. In 

addition to staggering income inequality, Europeans constantly confront barriers to success and well-being in 

the form of discrimination, the normative structuring of society, neglected infrastructure and sub-par public 

services.

According to the European Commission, ‘most indicators of well-being [in Europe] display a social gradient 

according to education level, occupation, income and social status. Educational persistence has not changed 

substantially across birth cohorts, suggesting that limited progress has been made in ensuring equal 

opportunities.’

Underinvestment in key public services and infrastructure has meant that people endure needless burdens, 

such as exorbitant housing costs, the lack of reliable and accessible transportation, poor access to healthcare, 

and schooling that fails to equip young people with the skills they need to thrive. Meanwhile, an estimated 

150 million Europeans are living with a mental health condition. Discrimination based on gender, sexuality, 

ethnic background or disability remains prevalent, stifling the life chances of millions. The EU scores just 70.2 

out of 100 according to the EU’s Gender Equality Index, reflecting women’s continued exclusion from political 

decision-making and unequal treatment in the workplace.

Human rights are under threat, with attacks on reproductive rights and a rise in hate crimes against 

LGBTQIA+ people. More than half of disabled people report having experienced discrimination, though many 

more have been discriminated against through an inherently ableist system. Furthermore, a digital divide has 

left many at a disadvantage, while the harmful effects of social media threaten the safety and well-being 

of all. Social injustices and inequality have, in turn, led to the rise of populist forces attuned to the justified 
discontent of Europe’s people. Enabling people to fulfil their potential and lead meaningful lives is therefore 

not only a social and economic good but a tool to defeat far-right populism.

Through the ‘Thriving Together Act’, we will harness the resources and wealth Europe already has to provide 

its citizens with the opportunities they need to flourish. We will ensure that factors such as geography, socio-

economic status, gender, ethnic background and disability no longer act as brakes on a person’s wellbeing. 

The provision of essential services, along with the elimination of barriers to education, work and other 
opportunities, will allow future generations to have equal chances to shape their own lives. The Act takes a 

holistic approach to tackling the social injustices that remain prevalent in European society. From education 

and access to work to healthcare, reproductive rights and digital rights, it will provide the means to create a 

Union that works for all its citizens, not just those privileged by circumstance. 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE

1. Promoting inclusivity 
and fighting discrimination

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Guarantee equal access to workplace 

same-sex partnership and marriage, legal 

opportunities without discrimination and 

gender recognition for trans people, and 

sanction enterprises that do not comply 

Freedom of Expression) are respected in 

with inclusive employment.

practice throughout the EU. Ensure that 

parents in rainbow families are recognised 

Introduce an EU anti-discrimination law that 

as such throughout the EU (e.g. when 

extends the existing protection in the area 

moving to another Member State).

of employment to other areas such as social 

security, education and the supply of goods 

.

Create EU funding schemes that are 

and services, including housing.

directly accessible by civic, social or political 

Push for the ratification of the Istanbul 

dialogue initiatives between divergent 

Convention by the remaining Member 

views on LGBTQIA+ rights and other 

States and its full implementation by the EU 

contentious topics that are fuelling a social 

and all Member States.

divide within Europe.

organisations to promote constructive 

Strengthen sanctions against hate crimes, 

.

Commit to fighting antisemitism. Educate 

including against hate speech and digital 

all citizens about Jewish culture and 

violence, by expanding the definitions of 

history, including historical persecution 

such offences.

and the responsibility arising from the 

Shoah. Further, develop the EU strategy 

Provide free access to menstrual hygiene 

for combating antisemitism in cooperation 

products for all.

with the Jewish community to defend 

Jews and Jewish institutions in Europe and 

Strongly encourage Member States to 

globally so that they can feel safe. Promote 

ban conversion therapy, depathologise 

respectful exchange and cooperation as 

transgender identities, enable trans people 

part of an inclusive society.

to have their gender legally recognised 

in a simple administrative procedure, and 

guarantee gender-affirming healthcare for 

LGBTQIA+ people.

Ensure that the Fundamental Rights of 

LGBTQIA+ people and the respective ECJ 

and ECHR rulings (e.g., on recognition of 

3434

Volt Europe

35
35

Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFEVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE 2. Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities

3. Lifelong education for 
social mobility

.

.

.

Compel remaining Member States to ratify 

the optional protocol to the UN Convention 

of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 

(CRPD) and create a European Disability 

Agency that ensures the harmonised 

implementation of these rights.

.

.

Press Member States to create clear 

roadmaps out of the institutional model, 

deploying the personal assistance services 

necessary for disabled people to actively 

participate in society.

Incorporate the CRPD as a binding standard 

Abolish discriminatory protection regimes 

into the EU’s legal framework, recognising 

such as guardianship, which deny legal 

the CRPD’s General Comments as the 

capacity for people with disabilities, by 

authoritative guidance to interpretation, in 

supporting the implementation of new 

line with the resolution of 18 June 2020 on 

supported decision-making (SDM) models.

the post-2020 European disability strategy, 

and allow for its direct referral by European 

Immediately cease all use of European 

citizens with disabilities.

funds to finance the construction of new 

institutions for disabled people within the 

EU and in third countries. 

.

.

.

.

Promote access to free, high-quality 

daycare and preschool programmes for 

every child from an early age.

Support the development of an inclusive 

and high-quality educational system that 

is free of charge, accessible, and offers 

every child the opportunity to achieve their 

potential, including by providing extra 

educational support for teachers and extra 

.

.

.

Ensure our university system is low or no 

tuition-fee-based and offers sufficient 

financial support for any student who needs 

it.

Develop extensive (re-)training and allow 

each person to get lifelong learning and 

easier pathways to change careers.

Promote, support the development of, 

social support for children with all kinds of 

and expand the accredited European 

disabilities.

School system into a comprehensive offer, 

including vocational training, to ensure free 

Equip young people for modern life 

access to multilingual, flexible, high-quality, 

and the labour market, by proposing 

inclusive and internationally competitive 

interdisciplinary school curricula that focus 

education for every child in Europe.

on key skills including English language 

competence, STEAM subjects supported 

by digital resources, citizenship education, 

and participatory skills such as inclusivity, 

sustainability, gender equality, mental 

health, media literacy and critical thinking 

(see also the ‘Good Jobs and Shared 

Prosperity Act’).

Attract and retain qualified educators 

and improve their reputation and working 

conditions by reforming teacher training 

and pay structures to reflect the vital 

role educators play, providing ongoing 

psychological support, and involving 

teachers in shaping education policy.

36

37

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE4. Strengthening European 
public health

5. Family planning and inclusive 
reproductive health and rights

.

.

.

Harmonise prevention programmes and 

public health systems through the European 

Health Union.

Implement EU-wide solutions for capacity, 

costs and reimbursement to ensure that all 

.

.

Strive to make the digital systems that are 

already integrated into healthcare systems 

more human-centred (see the ‘Empowering 

Europe’s Path to Prosperity Act’).

Recognise oral health as a human right 

European residents have access to first-rate 

and public health priority, and develop 

public healthcare.

and implement comprehensive oral health 

policies and strategies at the EU and 

Initiate a recruitment drive to ensure an 

national levels.

adequate number of healthcare workers in 

all spheres of health and community care.

.

.

.

.

Make abortion on request accessible in law 

and practice across the EU by removing all 

undue burdens and barriers to accessing 

and providing abortion care.

Ensure that all forms of contraception are 

provided free of charge or reimbursed by 

.

.

Propose an inclusive, standardised, Europe-

wide SRHR school curriculum, reflecting the 

variety of sexual and romantic orientations 

and gender identities, in line with UNESCO 

guidelines.

Press for the inclusion of SRHR in the EU 

insurance for all people regardless of age.

Treaties and of the right to abortion in the 

EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Ensure that measures to prevent sexually 

transmitted diseases (STDs), such as HIV-

PrEP and anonymous testing, are made 

available, accessible and free. 

Criminalise forced sterilisation and forced 

contraception.

38

39

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE6. Decriminalizing and 
regulating sex work

7. Social solidarity and 
community

.

.

.

Decriminalise sex work and ensure that 

systems of regulation reflect the needs 

of sex workers, including ensuring the 

existence of safe working places.

Ensure that sex workers receive insurance, 

healthcare and other standard protections.

Address violence and trafficking and ensure 

access for sex workers to channels of legal 

protection and redress.

.

.

.

Establish a highly qualified school health 

system to identify early symptoms of 

mental suffering. 

Provide child protection services with 

mental health professionals to bridge the 

gap between child protection and mental 

health care.

Counter the stigma around mental illness 

by educating children and adults about 

.

.

.

Improve digital mental well-being with 

EU-wide legislation that protects workers’ 

right to disconnect outside of office hours 

and educates children on the healthy use of 

digital technology.

Promote healthy ageing and develop 

community engagement by introducing a 

network of community volunteers.

Support the development of a European 

psychiatric conditions and discrimination.

network of community mental health 

services based on WHO guidance.

40

41

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE8. Tackling psychosocial risks

9. Affordable and accessible 
housing and vibrant cities

.

.

Encourage employers, school boards and 

.

Optimise care and cure for youths in 

training institutions to invest in reducing 

trouble by introducing low-threshold 

psychosocial risks like stress, violence and 

services where youngsters can meet with 

harassment, by integrating this into their 

professionals and fellow sufferers.

management protocols.

Deliver services for harm reduction while 

decriminalising addicted people and 

supporting those who are suffering.

.

.

.

.

Support and fund innovative housing 

models, such as co-housing, rent-to-own and 

lifelong renting programmes, to reduce the 

concentration of housing wealth and ease 

the financial barriers to home ownership.

Adopt and enforce WHO guidelines on air 

pollution exposure and residential green 

space availability in line with our ‘Health 

Ecosystems Act’. 

Dedicate European funds to the 

development of green infrastructure, the 

enhancement of public spaces, and the 

.

.

.

Encourage denser urban planning and 

efficient land use to reduce urban 

sprawl, thereby reducing carbon 

emissions, improving health and 

minimising disease, hospitalisation and 

death;

Make affordable and accessible 

local transportation a reality for all 

Europeans through the creation of 

comprehensive and reliable urban and 

suburban rail networks;

Employ best spatial planning practices 

realisation of the “15-minute city”, making 

to minimise crime and maximise safety, 

basic needs and services available in all 

including establishing ‘community 

communities reachable by active or public 

safety hubs’ dispersed throughout 

transport.

public spaces, staffed by trained 

personnel to assist and support those 

Empower the EU to provide direct funding 

encountering harassment or feeling 

to cities to support them, independent of 

vulnerable.

potential sanctions to the country. Set up 

a best practice sharing system for cities to 

discuss, among other issues, how to:

.

.

Fund the creation of liveable cities and 

towns, accessible to all, with vibrant 

social gathering spots, green spaces 

and recreational activities;

Promote active transportation like 

walking and cycling, and guarantee 

safe infrastructure, reducing traffic 

fatalities;

42

43

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE10. Improving train travel

11. Protecting digital rights

.

.

Create a European Transport Authority 

(ETA), with consultative legislative 

authority and financial resources, to shift 

responsibilities to the European level. The 

ETA will oversee investments in cross-

border and high-speed rail infrastructure 

across Europe, closing existing gaps in rail 

connectivity. 

Establish a unified rail ticketing platform 

.

.

Establish a comprehensive high-speed 

rail network connecting all EU cities with 

populations exceeding 100,000 residents, 

encompassing high-speed and sleeper trains 

and contributing to increased individual 

freedom and comfort, climate resilience 

efforts, public health and economic 

prosperity.

Task the ETA with pushing innovation and 

where any railway user can input two 

sustainability in the aviation and shipping 

stations in Europe, get a route and book 

industries. 

a ticket. The platform must also keep 

rail users appraised of real-time delays, 

costs, cancellations and the appropriate 

passenger rights that apply. The platform 

should include an open-access API, follow 

UIC MERITS and cover all (inter)national and 

cross-border trains.

.

.

.

Transform the Declaration on European 

Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital 

Decade into a binding legal instrument, so 

that the Declaration is upheld at every step 

of policy making.

Promote a mandatory opinion by the 

.

.

Provide dedicated funding for awareness-

raising campaigns to enable people to 

understand how newly enforced EU 

legislation impacts their fundamental rights 

and freedoms.

Collaborate with existing oversight bodies 

European Parliament’s LIBE committee for 

in Member States and civil society to ensure 

each regulatory proposal on digital matters 

legal requirements are upheld.

to guarantee that fundamental rights and 

freedoms are accounted for in the text.

Provide dedicated funding for 

representation to ensure people residing in 

the EU can bring violators to justice.

44

45

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE12. Digital Government

.

.

.

Support administrative best practice 

sharing and mutual support services across 

EU countries to ensure governments 

redesign processes from scratch when 

digitising them, ensuring their goals are 

met efficiently and citizens can understand 

and follow them easily, with clear timelines 

and outcomes.

.

.

Set up cross-border innovation teams, 

create a central “EU IT Traineeship 

Initiative” and introduce EU-sponsored 

skills certifications, boosting inter-EU 

collaboration and elevating the digital 

prowess of public sector employees.

Ensure offline availability of digital services, 

for example by staff guiding citizens 

Where appropriate, transition to paperless 

through digital processes.

processes in both EU institutions and 

Member States, adopting harmonised ICT 

standards and offering multi-device friendly 

services. 

Roll out the EU Digital Identity Wallet, 

which should be able to digitally store an EU 

ID, national ID and other public certificates 

from all Member States, while ensuring user 

control, decentralised data storage and 

robust data protection.

How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament

Article 2 of the TEU enshrines the values 

living in the European Union is a necessary step 

of respect for human dignity, freedom, 

to foster equality. People with disabilities need 

democracy, and equality. All European 

adequate legal protection inter alia through the 

legislation should be based on these principles 

proposal of a Directive on deinstitutionalisation 

and foster their implementation into the 

that implements a Europe-wide plan to 

lives of all EU citizens and people living in the 

guarantee independent living for those 

European Union.

diagnosed with a mental disorder or 

developmental disability. Volt will be working 

The Thriving Together Act addresses the 

towards introducing a law that regulates sex 

subjects of health, inclusivity, education, 

work in all Member States, decriminalising 

digitalisation, and social equality. Many of 

workers and providing them with adequate 

which the European Union cannot legally 

protection. To reflect changes such as 

regulate since the legislative competencies 

digitalisation and working from home Directive 

lie with the Member States. To implement 

2019/1152 on transparent and predictable 

the positive changes that are promoted by 

working conditions needs to be amended. 

this act, Volt suggests a Treaty change to 

The adaptation to a digitalised world will be 

make Public and Human Health and Education 

achieved by working towards a new European 

shared legislative competencies, allowing 

eGovernment Action Plan that includes policies 

the European Union to introduce common 

and actions on government process redesign, 

standards by law. Furthermore, to achieve 

transition to paperless processes, adaptation 

the ambitious objectives set out by this act, 

of harmonized ICT standards and multi-device 

new European legislation is needed and will 

friendly services. Furthermore, to ensure that 

be addressed by Volt within the European 

the development of the Interoperable Europe 

Parliament. Combining and updating existing 

Act (2022/0379 (COD)) takes an inclusive 

anti-discrimination Directives for clearer 

approach to stakeholder involvement, Volt 

arrangements and transparency (Directive 

advocates for the final act representing our 

2000/43/EC, Directive 2000/78/EC, Directive 

principles, digital rights, open data and Free 

2006/54/EC, Directive 2004/113/EC) and 

Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS).

working towards an “EU Anti-Discrimination 

law” that includes the rights of LGBTQIA+ 

people and protects the rights of all people 

Volt Europe

46
46

47

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFEEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
QUALITY OF LIFE

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The total costs of this Act, which consist of the 

implementation costs and the annual costs 

for five years, is € 2.864.062.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 1.295.637.500.000 

and the annual costs are € 313.684.900.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

campaigns.

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

running of the proposed policies.

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

4. Good Jobs and 
Shared Prosperity 
Act

Incomes, on average, have been growing in Europe over the last decades. However, they have not 

done so fast enough and not to the benefit of everyone. Productivity gains have also been slowing, 

showing the same uneven distribution. As a result, large inequalities persist across the EU, both 

locally and bloc-wide. Such a two-tier labour market means that some workers have safe and stable 

jobs, while others work with fewer rights and in unprotected workplaces. 

At the same time, areas with large potential for sustainable growth have witnessed severe skill 

shortages that hold back potential and hinder the labour force participation of young people and 

women, who additionally face a persistent gender gap in well-paying jobs and carry the larger burden 

of unpaid housework. 

Many vacant jobs exist and remain unfilled due to their poor working conditions, with labour 

protections and workplace rights enforced unevenly across Member States. These inequalities 

undermine the well-being of workers and hinder the establishment of a cohesive cross-border social 

fabric. 

The glaring absence of sufficient European social cohesion mechanisms further exacerbates the 

situation, preventing the pooling of resources and efforts necessary for tackling shared challenges. 

Consequently, poverty continues to persist at concerningly high rates, tarnishing the EU’s reputation 

as a bastion of prosperity and equality. Yet, these challenges are not insurmountable. They are self-

made. 

By creating a highly productive, fair, and meaningful work environment for all citizens we can 

promote the creation of a European Social Union that supports all Europeans and guarantees their 

rights. Harnessing technologies such as automation, AI and green technologies will boost labour 

productivity, resulting in new types of jobs, higher wages, and reduced working hours. Ensuring 

that EU citizens have the skills and education necessary for these technologies will guarantee their 

adoption to the benefit of workers. Remote work can unlock the full potential of the European 

labour market and robust workers’ rights will guarantee fair wages and working conditions for all 

workers, harmonising standards across the bloc. 

Finally, to end tax competition between Member States and facilitate the harmonisation of taxation, 

we propose to define a common minimum EU tax base for direct taxation.

Volt Europe

48
48

49
49

Volt Europe
Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE  
 
 
1.  A Truly European 
Social Union

2.  European welfare 
for all

.

.

Align social systems across the EU by 

harmonising systems of pensions, sick leave, 

unemployment insurance, and childcare 

benefits. 

Ensure universal childcare, shared parental 

leave, and transferable pension rights. 

.

Develop a truly European Social Union, 

leveraging the establishment of the new 

EU Ministry of Finance (see Empowering 

Europe’s Path to Prosperity and Reform 

the EU Acts) as a coordinating institution, 

and a tripled EU budget which provides 

investments, addresses social imbalances, 

and shields against economic downturns:

.

Create a European Basic Income 

(EBI), modelled after a negative 

tax system, where people earning 

below a certain income threshold 

receive payments instead of paying 

taxes. This provides a safety net and 

incentivises work to support people 

in escaping poverty traps. Have the 

EU’s Ministry of Finance make such 

payments from the EU budget, cost-

adjusting to each region to at least 

500 Purchasing Power Standards, 

.

.

.

.

Incentivise Member States to reduce 

the number of deductions in favour of 

lower income tax rates and to shrink 

the number of taxes to promote 

simplicity while ensuring citizens have 

dignified lives with the European Basic 

Income.

Define and enforce, in coordination 

with Member States, regionally 

adjusted minimum wage standards or 

a high level of union coverage, which 

ensures the European Basic Income 

cannot be exploited.

Harmonise taxation processes so 

that people have fewer barriers to 

work and living in multiple different 

European countries.

Ensure a common EU tax base for 

which is an income sufficient to cover 

direct national taxes by introducing 

basic living expenses. The principles 

EU-wide minimum effective rates for 

of EBI (European Basic Income) are 

gift, inheritance, and wealth taxation, 

necessary to harmonise and execute 

using the European Central Financial 

by the member states to reach a truly 

Wealth Data Register (see Empowering 

European union. The legal fundament 

Europe’s Path to Prosperity Act).

for EBI is already binding for all 

member states by the TFEU (Treaty 

and Functioning of the European 

Union) article 107, concerning state 

aid.

50

51

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE3.  Protection of 
workers’ rights

4.  Protecting remote work

.

.

.

.

Harmonise European labour law, with an 

exemplary European default work contract.

Enforce the protection of the rights of 

gig workers by requiring Member States 

to protect them either in the same way 

as individuals in full-time employment 

or create similar protections in terms of 

.

.

Establish ethical recruitment policies and 

principles. This can include bans on abusive 

practices and recruitment fees, as well 

as improving access to information for 

workers, including labour and trade union 

rights, complaints and redress mechanisms.

Establish a protected right to be offline 

health, pension, and unemployment.

outside of working hours.

Actively enforce the Blue Book Rights of 

workers across the continent, creating 

a European mechanism for monitoring 

workplace abuses, both for citizens as well 

as migrants.

Incentivise the introduction of gender 

equality measures. 

.

Require employers to accept the request 

for remote work from employees, unless a 

reasonable and fair reason can be provided 

as to why it should not take place.

.

.

Update regulations so that it becomes 

legally and fiscally simple to work remotely 

from anywhere in the EU.

Institute special regulations to protect the 

right of remote workers to disconnect.

52

53

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE5.  21st Century Education

6.  Reskilling and retraining

.

Align the EU approach to education with 

.

To enhance European productivity 

the promotion of STEAM subjects and “Life 

through locally produced sustainable 

competencies and responsibility” subjects 

consumer goods and enhance the 

in the Thriving Together Act:

value of technical education, we 

suggest establishing European 

Secondary Schools focused on 

.

.

 Create a special program introducing 

entrepreneurship and financial literacy 

craftsmanship, backed by EU funding 

education in schools EU-wide.

and industry expertise, nurturing 

students aged 10 to 12 towards trade 

Increase focus on developing digital 

skills, internships, specialisation, and 

a final masterwork, aiming to provide 

technically gifted students with an 

appealing educational path devoid of 

academic stigma.

skills in elementary and secondary 

schools within the EU, such as the 

already named media literacy in 

the Thriving Together Act, but also 

basic IT skills, information skills and 

computational thinking (including 

understanding how AI works), by 

renewing the commitment and 

accelerating the timeline of the ‘Digital 

Education Action Plan’.

.

Establish a European Skills Fund to:

.

.

Subsidise on-the-job training for 

incumbent workers in firms that 

adopt new green technologies and 

automation technologies.

Provide all Europeans with one grant 

every three years to be spent on 

accredited retraining schools in a dual 

system of classroom and on-the-job 

training/apprenticeships. 

54

55

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFE7.  Democracy in 
the workplace 

.

.

.

Democratise the workplace by requiring 

worker participation in boards of large 

companies.

Promote unionisation by protecting the 

right to collective bargaining and lifting 

barriers to entry for new and accountable 

unions and forms of representation

Create a harmonised status for cooperative 

companies so that they receive 

administrative support and tax incentives. 

Promote this status in key sectors of the 

economy to ensure the financial capital 

stays within the EU market.

How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament

The European economy should not exist as an 

the European Union. Therefore, we support 

end in itself but as a guarantee for prosperity 

the Parliament’s call to open the EU Treaties 

and economic security for all citizens of the 

via a convention composed of representatives 

European Union. The legislative framework 

of the national Parliaments, the heads of state 

of the European Union needs to reflect the 

or government of the Member States, of the 

objective of shared prosperity and economic 

European Parliament and of the Commission 

security more strongly by creating and changing 

who examine the proposal for a Treaty change. 

legislation as proposed by this act.

Here, we will make sure that the European 

Union receives the competence to collect taxes 

The act expresses the legal ambitions for a 

and issue debt. Potential indirect taxes, such 

European Basic income, an EU-tax reform, 

as digital or carbon taxes, could be outlined in 

a European minimum wage and collective 

a new protocol with the unanimous consent 

bargaining and a European Social Union. The 

of the Member States. The Directive (EU) 

establishment of a European Basic Income 

2022/2041 on adequate minimum wages in the 

requires far-reaching amendments as the EU 

European Union already exists but needs to be 

is currently not vested with direct authority 

strengthened. To establish European minimum 

over social security. Article 153 TFEU permits 

wages and enable cross-border collective 

the European Parliament to adopt supportive 

bargaining, Article 153 TFEU is employed. 

measures regarding the achievement of 

This provision allows for coordinated action 

fundamental social rights. A new protocol 

on working conditions and social protection. 

could grant the EU competence to develop 

Amending the TFEU to include a new chapter 

and fund a basic income system. A harmonized 

explicitly addressing social Union objectives 

EU tax base for gift and inheritance taxation 

and principles would allow for the deepening 

and wealth taxation as well as minimum rates 

of social policy integration. This would provide 

can be achieved by adopting directives similar 

a legal framework for cooperation while 

to the VAT Directives. Implementing EU taxes 

respecting Member States’ autonomy. 

necessitates, among others, amending Article 

311 TFEU, which deals with the European 

Union’s own resources system. A Treaty change 

is necessary to enable direct tax collection by 

56

57

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS QUALITY OF LIFEEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
QUALITY OF LIFE 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The total costs of this Act, which consist of the 

implementation costs and the annual costs 

for five years, is € 1.290.559.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 20.929.000.000 and 

the annual costs are € 253.926.000.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

campaigns.

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

running of the proposed policies.

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

5. Asylum Seekers 
and Refugees Act

Asylum seekers and refugees in Europe endure distressing conditions due to delayed decisions, 

inhumane reception conditions, mass detention and exclusion at EU borders. The distribution 

of asylum seekers among Member States remains contentious, leaving vulnerable individuals in 

legal limbo.

The current system is dysfunctional, forcing asylum seekers onto unsafe irregular routes. 

Violations of EU law by European border agencies and limited search and rescue missions 

exacerbate the disorganisation. Consequently, EU Member States’ obscure deals with 

autocratic regimes near their borders are not a viable solution and contribute to unnecessary 

deaths.

The urgency for change is magnified by global displacement on an unprecedented scale, 

driven by various factors including armed conflicts, persecution and environmental disasters. 

However, most refugees from Africa and Asia seek refuge in neighbouring countries, not 

Europe. Volt recognises that although the EU’s refugee population is a small fraction of its 

total, it still contributes to the multicultural and diverse fabric of European societies. 

To address these challenges, Europe needs an efficient, fair and humane system. The Asylum 

Seekers and Refugees Act offers concrete solutions to address the challenge of integrating 

asylum seekers and refugees. It establishes common, swift and fair asylum procedures and 

reception conditions to ensure humane treatment.

To ease the disproportionate burden on border Member States and ensure that people are 

placed in environments where they can rebuild their lives, this act introduces a fair relocation 

system triggered upon arrival, which distributes asylum seekers evenly within the boundaries 

of objective criteria, while considering personal preferences. Immediate access to social, legal, 
medical and psychological assistance is prioritised. Subsequently, it promotes immediate 

integration and empowerment of refugees and asylum-seekers, recognising their potential to 

contribute to society. 

Furthermore, this Act emphasises protecting the human rights of vulnerable individuals by 

establishing safe regular pathways for refugees and monitoring violations of those rights. 

By the same token, legally recognizing climate refugees upholds human rights and promotes 

a forward-looking approach to addressing the challenges of climate-induced displacement. 
Meanwhile, through the establishment of additional regular channels for labour migration, as 

discussed in the labour migration act, the influx of asylum seekers to Europe is reduced.  

This Act improves conditions for asylum seekers in the EU and addresses concerns outside EU 

borders, focusing on root causes and reception improvements in the region.

Volt Europe

58
58

59
59

Volt Europe
Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSQUALITY OF LIFE 1. Right to seek asylum

2. Safe and regular pathways 
for refugees

.

.

Support decentralised asylum procedures in 

.

Provide refuge and protection under the 

final destinations where integration efforts 

Geneva Convention, and refuse external 

are possible during the asylum process. 

agreements that might compromise 

Do not outsource asylum applications to 

refugees’ well-being or infringe upon their 

remote locations or even third countries. 

human rights. Invest further in international 

Support the EU’s commitment to human 

to cooperate constructively with third 

rights and its international obligations and 

countries, the UNHCR, academics, and other 

ensure the integrity of the asylum-seeking 

voluntary refugee organisations. 

instruments, like the Global Refugee Forum, 

process within the EU. 

.

.

.

Establish regular pathways to the EU 

.

Support the collaboration among 

and end the massive losses of lives in 

governments, international organisations, 

the Mediterranean and the Atlantic by 

and NGOs for identifying and offering 

simplifying visa processes, the provision of 

reception to vulnerable individuals, either 

humanitarian visas and resettlement.

during crises or as a long-term solution to 

displacement challenges.

Make use of prima facie recognition and 

temporary protection mechanisms.

Create humanitarian corridors to provide 

safe and regular passage to vulnerable 

individuals, who often resort to dangerous 

and irregular routes.

60

61

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION3. Humane, fast and fair 
asylum procedures

4. Fair relocation system

.

.

Register asylum-seekers upon arrival and 

inform them about the procedure swiftly in 

open registration centres at EU borders for 

efficient initial documentation, security and 

medical checks.  

Provide streamlined procedures to 

.

.

.

Build a system through which children are 

never detained.

Ensure a unified database accessible to 

both national authorities and EU agencies. 

Ensure a system through which all asylum 

prevent unnecessary delays and protect 

seekers are transferred to their final 

persons in vulnerable situations, including 

Member State as swiftly as possible. 

(unaccompanied) minors, pregnant women 

and persons with disabilities, who should 

be identified throughout the asylum 

procedure, particularly upon arrival, and 

receive adequate support. Guardians 

or specially trained assistants must be 

available for unaccompanied minors seeking 

asylum as soon as they are identified.

.

.

Commit to a Common European Asylum 

.

Use important indicators, such as GDP and 

System in which responsibilities are shared 

population density, to determine each 

in a spirit of solidarity among Member 

Member State’s asylum seeker quota. 

States and supported in all aspects by the 

Consider meaningful links that the asylum 

European Asylum Agency (EUAA). Work 

seeker might have, such as family and 

towards a European Asylum Status that is 

community ties, language proficiency and 

granted by the European Asylum Agency 

qualifications. Consider the voluntary 

across the Union. 

solidarity capacity of regions, cities, and 

municipalities in the relocation efforts. 

Abolish the principle of first entry and 

Ensure that cities and municipalities can 

ensure asylum seekers are distributed 

plan more long-term in terms of their 

according to a mandatory distribution key 

housing and integration capacities with the 

among Member States.

distribution key.

.

Enforce compliance through a robust 

system of penalties for non-compliant 

Member States.

62

63

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION5. No detainment of 
asylum seekers

6. Common European 
Asylum System

.

.

.

.

.

Enforce that the Member States shall not 

hold a person in detention for the sole 

reason that he or she is an applicant.

The grounds for and conditions of 

detention, and the guarantees available to 

.

.

Ensure that the rules for the detention in 

the framework of the asylum or the return 

procedures are harmonised among Member 

States.

Ensure that applicants with special 

detained applicants, shall be in accordance 

reception needs have access to 

with the Reception Conditions Directive. 

full reception conditions, including 

Ensure that children are never detained.

exemptions should require minimal criteria, 

relying on an initial assessment of their 

Develop and apply alternatives to the 

narratives by a psychologist).

rehabilitation (qualifications for such 

detention of asylum seekers in all Member 

States.

Ensure that detention of asylum seekers is 

always the last resort after all alternatives 

have been exhausted.

.

.

.

.

Establish a Common European Asylum 

System with a uniform asylum procedure 

that respects the dignity and rights of 

asylum-seekers while fostering social 

integration and cooperation.

Speed up all asylum procedures to a 

maximum of 3 months from entering 

.

.

Protect against threats and violence arising 

from an applicant’s gender, including 

gender identity and sexual orientation, 

by systematically applying the concept of 

“particular social group” under the Geneva 

Convention.

Allow asylum-seekers to recover from their 

the country to the first decision, while 

journey before their asylum interviews, 

guaranteeing social, legal and psychological 

to prevent them from having inadequate 

support and decent conditions throughout 

preparation or limited opportunities to seek 

the procedure. Make use of written prima 

legal counsel, reducing the risk of negative 

facie procedures for positive decisions 

decisions due to difficulties in presenting 

when administrations are overburdened.

their case. 

Ensure that the EUAA remains at the 

forefront when it comes to a standardised 

asylum process; enable the EUAA to 

cooperate intensively with Member States 

.

.

Update the Eurodac database for efficient 

identification with health information. 

Establish a transparent system for 

to modernise their asylum systems so 

monitoring the compliance of Member 

that they are up to the challenge and 

States with the EU asylum rules.

to intervene independently to ensure 

that even large numbers of arrivals are 

dealt with in an orderly way, in particular 

regarding arrivals by sea.

Harmonise standards for uniform 

procedures and reception conditions, 

including the notion that the decision to 

grant asylum is the same for each Member 

State.

64

65

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION7. Integration and 
empowerment of refugees 
and asylum-seekers

.

.

.

Ensure refugees have at least the same 

rights and pathways to citizenship as other 

third-country nationals in the member 

states.

As all integration is local, set up a local 

integration fund to address the growing 

needs of cities and municipalities and add 

integration as a European competence. 

Support community-based decentralised 

social housing and other infrastructure for 

the most vulnerable groups, including locals 

.

.

.

Allow asylum seekers to work from day 

one. Ensure that work permits are always 

granted for a sufficient time frame to allow 

for meaningful employment.

Reunite asylum seekers with their families 

as quickly as possible after arrival. Let 

refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary 

protection be equally entitled to be 

reunited with their families under the 

Family Reunification Directive (2003/86/EC).

Ensure better representation of migrants’ 

and asylum seekers, and build inclusive local 

voices in the political sphere and active 

centres, offer health services, education, 

engagement with migrant communities on 

cultural exchange, voluntary activities, 

local, national and European levels. 

language training, and upskilling and 

reskilling benefitting as well as the local 

population, asylum seekers and migrants in 

need.

8. Ending statelessness

.

.

Harmonise administrative procedures 

for statelessness recognition ensuring 

access to nationality for stateless persons, 

granting access to essential services, 

supporting unaccompanied stateless minors 

and sharing best practices among EU 

Member States.

Uphold the rights of stateless individuals 

and contribute to their integration and well-

being in the European Union.

66

67

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION 
9. Fixing Border and Coastal 
Guard Agency

10. Combating human 
trafficking

.

.

Enhance EU search and rescue missions, and 

.

Reinforce the fundamental rights 

ensure SAR operations and humanitarian 

monitoring mechanism as part of the 

efforts that mitigate or eliminate the risks 

operational plans, systematically investigate 

of irregular pathways (e.g. sea rescue 

human rights violation allegations and 

or evacuation). Protect the legality of 

adopt a zero-tolerance policy towards 

humanitarian efforts and ensure official 

personnel involved in fundamental rights 

collaboration with EU and national 

violations or obstruct their investigations. 

authorities.

Prioritise transparency through regular 

report publication, and share reports with 

Members of the European Parliament 

and national parliaments. Ensure Frontex 

Fundamental Rights officers are part 

of any operation and all pushbacks by 

national border control are brought to a 

national court. Reinforce the cooperation 

of the EUAA with Frontex to enhance the 

protection of asylum seekers.

.

Integrate a victim-centred approach to the 

complex challenge of human trafficking 

intertwined with crimes like migrant 

smuggling and cybercrime. This means an 

all-encompassing strategy, prioritising the 

assessment of individual needs over law 

enforcement interests, which should extend 

across European, national, and local levels 

to provide assistance and protection for 

trafficking victims.

.

.

.

.

Address the challenges posed by the 

increasing digitisation of trafficking in 

human beings and enhance the criminal 

law response to technology-facilitated 

offences.

Facilitate the tracing, freezing, management 

and confiscation of proceeds of trafficking 

in human beings.

Incorporate feminist and disability 

perspectives, focusing on prevention 

strategies.

Promote international cooperation. 

68

69

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION11. International development 
cooperation

12. Improving returns 

.

In the medium term, ensure that nobody is 

.

Improve the regional reception also via the 

forced to leave the safety of their homes, 

Global Refugee Forum. 

by promoting development cooperation: 

.

.

.

.

.

 Continue to combine short-term 

humanitarian aid with long-term 

development strategies.

Bolster economic opportunities in 

.

.

 Build international support structures 

for Internally Displaced Persons 

(IDPs) who are displaced within their 

countries.

Offer international assistance to 

vulnerable countries through support 

host countries and allocate resources 

packages and direct investments, 

for secure humanitarian centres 

reinforcing partnerships with African 

in crisis-prone areas, providing 

nations under the Strategy with Africa.

shelter, education and streamlined 

resettlement processes.

De-link cooperation with third 

countries from migration control 

policies.

Promote education programs on 

migration realities, supported by the 

EU through migrant associations in 

these countries.

Ensure that human rights are 

safeguarded in any migration pact with 

third countries with a human rights 

yardstick.

.

.

.

.

Put human rights at the core of the Union 

readmission agreements and oppose deals 

with authoritarian regimes. Prioritise 

partnerships with third countries for 

coordinated returns in the framework 

of a respectful and mutually beneficial 

.

.

Establish access to legal advice and support, 

along with integrated reintegration 

programs in the country of origin tailored to 

returnees’ needs.

Respect individual circumstances and 

readmission process combined with legal 

human dignity when promoting successful 

migration policies.

reintegration in countries of origin. 

Ensure that EU countries uphold 

fundamental rights and procedural 

safeguards during the application of returns 

and support voluntary returns. 

Harmonise the approach across Member 

States regarding safe third-country 

concepts. 

Ensure that Member States strictly respect 

the non-refoulement principle. Oppose the 

repatriation of migrants to countries that 

are not considered safe.

70

71

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION13. Legal protection for 
climate refugees 

How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament

.

Adapt the current EU framework to 

recognise a legally binding definition of 

climate refugees, ensure that the term 

is adopted under international law, and 

extend humanitarian visas to climate 

refugees.

The right to asylum, enshrined in Art. 18 of 

requires the proposed Asylum Procedure 

the EU Charter is a fundamental right that 

Regulation 2016/0224 (COD) to further 

Volt wants to safeguard and strengthen in 

harmonize asylum procedures and to account 

subsequent legislation. This includes a revision 

for humane and streamlined procedures at the 

of the New Pact on Migration and Asylum which 

borders. The proposed Qualification Regulation 

was proposed in September 2020. The Pact is 

2016/0223 (COD) and Reception Condition 

accompanied by several legislative proposals 

Directive 2016/0222 (COD) must harmonize 

among others, the Qualification Regulation 

standards across Member States including 

2016/0223 (COD), the Asylum Procedure 

a uniform approach to granting asylum and 

Regulation 2016/0224 (COD), the Reception 

sufficient reception conditions. In addition, the 

Condition Directive 2016/0222 (COD), as well 

Pact shall highlight that detention of asylum 

as the Asylum and Migration Management 

seekers can only be a measure of last resort 

Regulation 2020/0279(COD) (AMMR) recently 

and ensure that minors may not be detained. 

agreed upon by the Council. 

Moreover, Volt wants to support the revision of 

the Anti-Trafficking Directive 2011/36/EU and 

Volt aims at providing the Union with 

call on all Member States to improve the early 

competencies to legislate on harmonized 

identification and referral of victims to support 

integration policies on the occasion of a 

services, in particular in the context of the 

forthcoming Treaty change. Based on the 

asylum procedure. Refugees and beneficiaries 

Moonshot policies falling under this act further 

of subsidiary protection shall be equally 

updates are suggested to EU legislation. In 

entitled to be reunited with their families under 

addition, the so-called solidarity mechanism 

the Family Reunification Directive 2003/86/EC. 

as set out by the AMMR, which is currently 

To recognise the status of climate refugees, 

facilitating the mandatory relocation needs 

Volt will advocate for international and EU 

to be altered to ensure a fair and efficient 

treaties as well as secondary legislation such 

relocation by accounting for personal links of 

as the Qualification Directive to recognise the 

refugees and Member States’ key indicators 

status. 

such as, for example, GDP. Furthermore, Volt 

72

73

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATIONEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
HUMANE MIGRATION 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
HUMANE MIGRATION

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 66.314.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 3.539.000.000 and 

the annual costs are € 12.555.000.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

campaigns.

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

running of the proposed policies.

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

6. Labour Migration 
Act

Europe’s demographic challenge, characterised by an ageing population and skill shortages, 

presents an opportunity for innovation and adaptability that could enhance its long-term 

competitiveness and economic resilience. Therefore, there is a need to attract and retain 

international talent while ensuring equal rights for non-EU workers. This is essential to prevent 

labour exploitation and create an attractive environment for third-country nationals across all 

wage levels.

Low- and medium-wage sector workers often face precarious conditions and risk labour 

exploitation due to their non-EU status, as their employment is tied to specific employers. In 

contrast, high-wage labour migration faces bureaucratic hurdles that limit their mobility within 

the EU and lead many skilled workers to emigrate to more favourable destinations like Canada, 

the US and Australia.

The fragmentation of labour markets across Member States presents challenges to 

competitiveness. A common European migration code would enhance vitality and growth by 

effectively managing migration, filling skill gaps, fostering innovation and sustaining critical 

industries. Facilitating the mobility of third-country nationals would enable them to address 

labour market challenges not only in one country but across the entire EU, benefiting both 

economies and societies.

Volt aims to create an efficient system that respects migrant workers’ rights, enhances their 

appeal to the EU labour market, boosts competitiveness, and fosters European Union prosperity 

and social cohesion.

To this end, we advocate for a uniform EU rights-based framework, including decoupling residence 
permits from employers, ensuring family reunification rights and providing access to social 

benefits. These changes empower migrants, creating a fair and equal labour market.

We also prioritise establishing safe and regular pathways for migrant workers to address labour 

shortages and skills gaps, making the EU labour market more dynamic and responsive.

Recognizing the benefits of intra and inter-EU mobility, we streamline processes for efficient 

labour markets and better migrant integration, promoting social cohesion. This approach 
enhances the EU’s overall attractiveness, making it more competitive for skilled workers while 

benefiting all member states’ development and prosperity.

Volt Europe

74
74

75
75

Volt Europe
Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION 1. Low and medium-wage 
labour migration

Establish a European Migration Code with 

new legal pathways for all wage and skill 

levels to address labour shortages in an 

ageing society.

Attract international talent with a “Make it 

in Europe” programme to match vacancies 

.

.

Grant visa holders the freedom to move 

across the EU to unify the European 

labour market for third-country nationals. 

Harmonise intra-EU mobility right across 

various directives.

Allow migrant applications for a residence 

of European employers with international 

permit from within the EU for all migrants, 

talent for all wage and skill levels and from 

irrespective of their status or lack of 

all countries of origin.

residence status. 

Create an EU Talent pooling and matching 

platform for labour migrants that addresses 

skills shortages and mismatches within 

the EU labour market and that facilitates 

recognition of foreign qualifications and 

skills on the EU level. 

Ensure that recognition of non-EU 

qualifications and skills is eased for the 

benefit of mutual recognition on the EU 

level, which will open up new opportunities 

.

.

.

Grant and strengthen family reunification 

rights for all migrant workers by improving 

the implementation of the family 

reunification directive.

Strengthen access to social rights, including 

the right to healthcare, social security, 

housing, justice and realisation of gender 

equality.

Add English as an official language. Migrant 

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Protect migrant workers from labour 

exploitation by delinking residence permits 

from single employers and their particular 

jobs and increasing the length of stay 

to protect especially those in seasonal 

and temporary work arrangements 

since the loss of employment would not 

automatically lead to a loss of residence 

status.

Adopt the Commission guidelines to 

incentivize victims of labour exploitation 

to report their experiences to a monitoring 

authority without facing the risk of 

expulsion.

Put a special emphasis on establishing 

a ‘firewall’ between labour justice and 

immigration enforcement, which would 

allow migrant workers to safely file a 

complaint against abusive employers 

without fear of losing their residence 

status, or in the case of undocumented 

migrants, being detained and deported. 

The European Labour Authority can play an 

important role in coordinating this.

Enforce strict and heavy EU penalties on 

member states where there are recurring 

situations of exploitative work for migrant 

for students, researchers and other 

workers, whether outside the EU or intra-

workers.

professionals.

EU migrant workers, should have access 

to language services when dealing with 

Speed up visa processes to last a maximum 

governmental bureaucracy so that local 

of 3 months.

language does not become a barrier. This 

could be optimised through centralised, 

Create regular and safe pathways to 

digital platforms. For example, this will 

address the current unmet demand in low 

improve access to Social Security or 

and medium-wage sectors. This includes 

unemployment rights.

new channels such as job-seeker and 

vocational-training visas, job-seeking visas, 

and youth mobility schemes, accessible to 

all migrant workers.

76

77

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION 
2. High-wage labour 
migration

3. Undocumented 
migration 

.

.

.

.

Embrace an open and dynamic approach 

.

Naturalisation: free, simple and quick 

to immigration, especially for high-skilled 

naturalisation process for labour 

workers from outside the EU, to fight 

the unprecedented challenges of the 

migrants who have spent 3 years in the 

EU contributing to the EU economy 

21st Century, from geopolitical tensions 

(maximum of 2 months processing).

and competition to the climate crisis and 

growing inequalities. 

Develop a new framework to attract talent 

that contributes to innovation, growth 

and competitiveness and ensure fair and 

transparent conditions for all workers, 

regardless of their origins. 

Foster social cohesion and integration 

by promoting cultural diversity, mutual 

respect, and civic participation.

Launch an EU Blue Card scheme to simplify 

and harmonise the admission criteria and 

procedures for highly skilled workers:

.

.

.

Launch an EU Talent Pool to match highly 

skilled workers with employers across the 

EU, based on an online platform that allows 

workers to register their profile, skills, 

qualifications, and preferences and allows 

employers to access the pool and offer jobs 

to suitable candidates.

Launch an EU Skills Recognition Framework 

to facilitate the unbureaucratic recognition 

of foreign qualifications and competencies 

across the EU, providing common standards, 

guidelines, and tools for assessing and 

validating skills acquired outside the EU.

Launch an EU Integration Strategy to 

.

.

Ensure that the EU offers crucial services, 

protection and support to those lacking 

legal status to reduce exploitation and 

foster social cohesion by facilitating fair 

treatment and integration opportunities. 

Implement an orderly and condition-based 

administrative system that enables status 

change from irregular to regular economic 

migrants, without undermining the asylum 

decision.

.

.

.

Application: unbureaucratic, fast-track, 

support the social inclusion of highly 

simplified, online process at single EU-

skilled workers and their families through 

wide application points (maximum of 

language courses, cultural orientation 

14 days processing).

programmes, mentoring schemes, and civic 

initiatives, and encourage greater dialogue 

Renewal: simplified online renewal 

and cooperation between migrants and 

process with a longer validity period.

host communities.

Mobility: flexible single EU-wide 

mobility scheme for highly skilled 

migrants who wish to move to a job in 

another EU country, to retain highly 

skilled workers in the EU.

78

79

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATIONHow we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

According to Article 79 of the TFEU, the EU may 

EU Member States for all wage and skill levels 

adopt measures relating to conditions of entry 

to address labour shortages in an ageing 

and residence, as well as the definition of rights 

society. Volt wants to grant and strengthen 

of third-country nationals legally residing in 

family reunification rights for all migrant 

the EU. Moreover, Article 21 of the Charter of 

workers by improving the implementation of 

Fundamental Rights of the European Union lays 

the Family Reunification Directive 2003/86/EC. 

down the right to non-discrimination.

Moreover, a modernized Single Permit Directive 

Volt requires the New Pact on Migration and 

to work and stay in the EU as well as the right 

Asylum to further implement the notion of 

to equal treatment, particularly for low- and 

reinforcing safe and legal migration, equal 

medium-waged workers. Volt supports the 

2022/0131(COD) shall strengthen the right 

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 4.753.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 645.500.000 and 

the annual costs are € 821.500.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

rights for non-EU workers and approaches 

revision of the Long-term Residents Directive 

campaigns.

to regularize undocumented migrants. To 

2003/109/EC, to allow third-country nationals 

strengthen existing legislation in the field of 

to ask for citizenship after 3 years of legal stay 

integration of third-country nationals and, 

in the Union in all Member States. Furthermore, 

the rights of migrants and their families as 

Volt wants to expand the new rights under 

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

well as to facilitate legal pathways to the EU, 

the revised BlueCard Directive by exempting 

running of the proposed policies.

Volt wants to establish a European Migration 

more professions from the university degree 

Code. This will include, inter alia, a talent pool 

requirement.

to match and facilitate labour needs among 

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

80

81

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSHUMANE MIGRATION EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS HUMANE MIGRATION7. Reform the EU Act 

1.  Federal Europe 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT

A fully integrated European Union remains a work in progress. An “ever closer Union among the 

peoples of Europe” cannot be achieved if we do not take ambitious steps towards a Federal EU.

.

Initiate a European Convention to reform 

.

Build the path towards a European 

the European Treaties in the new legislative 

Federal Declaration and the legitimate 

basis for a Constitutional Convention 

to draft a European Constitution, 

which establishes a Federal Europe 

based on democratic legitimacy and 

accountability.

This Union is today as essential as it was when it was created in the aftermath of the Second 

term:

.

Engage through citizen debates 

to define and shape the values, 

competencies, finances, and 

institutional setup of a Federal Europe, 

building on the European Parliament’s 

proposal to reform the EU.

World War and is increasingly becoming a geopolitical necessity. Issues such as climate change, 

migration, global economic competition and the disregard for the rules-based international order 

cannot be tackled by small, individual actors, and demand unified action. Even within the EU, the 

current structure allows any single Member State to block crucial legislation, sanctions packages 

or trade deals that may be of fundamental importance to millions of European citizens. To deliver 

tangible benefits and better serve its citizens, the EU needs to reform. 

The “Reform the EU Act” seeks to fortify the EU’s capacity for collective action, ensuring that 

Member States collaborate effectively to address shared challenges. Central to this is the 

bolstering of the EU’s democratic legitimacy. The current institutional framework prioritises the 

interests of Member States over those of citizens, creating decision-making processes that are 

inefficient and heavily influenced by national interest, limiting the EU’s ability to act fast and 

with ambition in the interest of the people. 

With EU enlargement on the horizon, the old ways of decision-making also require reform to 

reflect the myriad of interconnected challenges we face. Additional voices in the Council after 

enlargement will intensify debate and risk regular gridlock. At the same time, the European 

Parliament, the only directly elected EU institution, remains unable to propose legislation and 

must wait for other institutions to act. 

Establishing a European Constitution and an elected EU government will increase transparency 

and place citizens and democratic legitimacy at the heart of European democracy. Bridging 
the gap between citizens and the institutions will reinforce trust in the Union, creating a true 

European representative democracy and counteracting harmful disillusionment in the political 

system, and provide the EU with the capacity to effectively respond to challenges both at 

home and abroad. Forming a true fiscal and monetary union will enable a cohesive, unified and 

transparent system that enhances the EU’s capacity to address economic shocks effectively. 

Volt Europe

8282

83
83

Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNTVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT 2.  A European Government 

3.  Legislative initiative for 
the European Parliament

.

Reform the European Commission into a 

European Government:

.

.

Elect an EU Prime Minister from the 

Members of the European Parliament, 

in place of the President of the 

European Commission. 

Grant the Prime Minister leadership 

over a Cabinet of Ministers, whose 

size is not determined by the number 

of Member States, but by the needs 

of the EU government and its citizens. 

There should be a maximum of one 

minister from each member state.

.

.

.

Allow the Prime Minister to propose 

Ministers to be confirmed by the 

European Parliament. Each Minister 

will head a Ministry which will replace 

the current Directorates-General 

system in the European Commission.

Allow for the removal from office 

of any Minister or of the European 

Government as a whole by a vote 

of no confidence by the European 

Parliament at any time, thus making it 

accountable to European citizens.

Make this executive branch 

accountable to voters, depending on 

the European Parliament’s confidence 

and the European Senate.

.

.

The role of the European Parliament must 

.

The EU government is consulted and can 

change from merely co-deciding laws to 

propose amendments, though the voting 

initiating new legislation - a power that 

power lies with the co-legislators: the 

would be shared with the Senate, the EU 

European Parliament and the European 

Citizens via the European Citizens’ Initiative 

Senate.

(ECI) and the European Government.

New laws can be proposed by a political 

group or an equivalent minimum number of 

individual MEPs that would be required to 

form a political group.

84

85

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT5.  Constitutional Court and 
European Court of Human 
Rights (ECHR)

.

Transform the Court of Justice of 

the European Union (CJEU) into a 

.

Make ECHR rulings universal to bring 

uniformity to human rights standards across 

Constitutional Court to consolidate the 

the bloc, incentivising proactive compliance 

legal and democratic foundations of the 

and streamlining enforcement processes. 

European Union, contributing towards 

a uniform interpretation of EU laws and 

affirming the primacy of EU legislation. 

Deepen democratic engagement by 

empowering citizens and member states 

with a structured platform to challenge and 

scrutinise EU decisions on constitutional 

grounds and the basis of fundamental 

rights.

4.  A European Senate

.

.

Establish a European Senate:

.

.

Transform the Council of the European 

Union into the European Senate, 

serving as the EU’s second chamber. 

Abolish the European Council.

Design the European Senate to 

represent Member States with 

an equal number of senators per 

Member State designated by national 

parliaments. This chamber would 

have an equal number of senators per 

member state, ensuring that all states 

have an equal say in the legislative 

process.

In the meantime, ensure the ability to 

make decisions through Qualified Majority 

Voting (QMV) instead of unanimity. This is 

particularly relevant for those topics that 

currently fall under the Common Foreign 

and Security Policy (CFSP), for example, 

sanctions, but also for enlargement or 

taxation. For certain decisions, such as 

treaty change, military deployments or EU 

enlargement, a form of reinforced qualified 

majority voting will apply.

86

87

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT6.  Fiscal and monetary 
union 

7.  Regulatory enforcement

.

.

.

Reform the fiscal architecture of the 

European Union by tripling the EU budget 

to provide investments, address social 

imbalances, and shield against economic 

downturns. 

Allow a democratic Europe to levy its taxes, 

especially on unsustainable consumption 

and severe wealth inequality, to fund its 

budget, supported by clear and binding 

budget rules for Member States and greater 

flexibility than in the current Maastricht 

criteria. 

Promote debt issuance by the EU aimed 

at fostering investments into economic 

development projects in line with common 

.

.

.

.

Create budgetary instruments that 

automatically increase spending in 

downturns and allow more budgetary 

flexibility if a recession looms to weather 

cyclical macroeconomic downturns. 

Encourage the remaining Member States 

to adopt the Euro, fostering economic 

cohesion and stability.

Create a dual mandate for the European 

Central Bank (ECB), ensuring both price 

stability and employment, committing to 

a Europe that thrives on both financial 

prudence and inclusive growth. 

Establish an EU Ministry of Finance to act 

European needs. The creation of such 

as a regulator, setting and harmonising 

European debt will safeguard financial 

standards for national tax administrations.

stability in an integrated financial market. 

At the same time, the new fiscal and 

monetary union should provide more 

effective institutionalised tools to 

guarantee that Member States maintain a 

balanced budget in structural terms.

.

Establish independent authorities at 

the European Level that support the 

interpretation of core concepts and the 

harmonious application of the EU normative 

corpus, which grows consistently, across 

various EU jurisdictions:

.

.

.

Work in collaboration with 

Issue guidance and binding decisions 

on the application of the horizontal 

legal framework and on any legislative 

(vertical) proposal that stems from it.

Oversee the application and 

cross-border enforcement of the 

regulation, adopt opinions to ensure 

representatives from Member States, 

the consistency of application of the 

researchers and civil society. They 

regulation by the national supervisory 

will not take their instructions from 

authorities and act as a dispute 

anybody.

resolution body.

88

89

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNTHow we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

To fortify the EU’s capacity for collective action, 

Volt strives to make the EU’s decision-making 

Volt aims to establish a European Convention 

process more effective by strengthening 

on a Federal Europe. This Convention would 

qualified majority voting as opposed to 

transform the two EU Treaties into a European 

unanimity decision-making for Council decisions 

Constitution and modernize the legislative 

under Article 7 TEU. Additionally, by removing 

framework by reforming the role of the 

the veto ability of  Member States in Council 

European Union institutions. The Council of 

decisions Volt wants to reinforce the Union’s 

the European Union should be transformed 

founding values and principles in Article 2 TEU 

into the European Senate, serving as the EU’s 

such as human dignity, freedom, democracy, 

second chamber which requires a Treaty change 

equality, the rule of law and respect for human 

regarding the procedure of the creation of 

rights. Regarding the judicial system of the 

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 4.306.500.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 876.500.000 and 

the annual costs are € 686.000.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

the Council in Article 15 TEU.  Moreover, the 

Union, Volt advocates for the enforcement 

campaigns.

European Parliament’s legislative powers 

of Article 6 TEU for the judgments of the 

shall be extended by granting it legislative 

European Convention of Human Rights to 

competence, requiring a change of Article 

become binding on the EU and in turn on the 

17 TEU, which as of now only allows the 

Member States. This is essential for the equal 

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

Commission such initiative unless stated 

protection of human rights standards across 

running of the proposed policies.

otherwise in the Treaties.

the Union. Furthermore, for a true unified 

fiscal system to be achieved, European taxes 

must be levied. The competence to raise direct 

taxes requires new primary and secondary EU 

legislation to expand and add to the existing 

harmonized standards on taxation on a 

supranational level. To realize the potential of 

indirect taxes, such as digital or carbon taxes, 

a new protocol may be established based on 

the consent of Member States. Implementing 

binding budget rules that keep national debt 

in check requires, among others, a reform of 

Article 121 TFEU.

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

Volt Europe

90
90

91

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNTEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAM POLICY PROPOSALS 
MAKING VOTES COUNT

1.  European political parties

.

.

Reform the current structure of European 

political parties (EuPP), which consists 

of national parties with often conflicting 

interests and priorities, focused on 

representing national or regional interests, 

rather than the interests of European 

citizens.

.

.

Reform the regulation on EuPPs, making 

individual membership of citizens standard, 

in contrast to the current model where 

EuPPs are alliances of national parties. 

Allow for a stronger and more cohesive link 

between EuPPs and their national, regional 

and local branches, operating across the EU 

Create full-fledged, pan-European political 

under one name.

parties that promote the general interest of 

all European citizens. 

8. European 
Democracy Act 

Creating a more democratic union is a path to a fairer and more just EU and a necessity for 

tackling modern challenges. A system prioritising the national interest over that of 500 million 

citizens creates fundamental problems and a deepening divide between citizens and the 

institutions that govern them. This resulting misalignment gives rise to a democratic deficit 

that erodes public trust in the European project. 

Political discontent is further exacerbated by the lack of transparency that shrouds EU 

decision-making. The European Council has become one of the most powerful political bodies 

and yet is the most untransparent, making backroom deals without scrutiny that seal the fate 

of millions of European citizens. This opacity has contributed to a growing disillusionment 

among citizens who feel disconnected from the processes that shape their lives.

The European Democracy Act will seek to create a clear link between European citizens and the 

EU decision-making processes, rectifying systemic deficiencies and bridging the gap between 

citizens and their institutions. Citizens will understand and be able to influence the decisions 

that shape their lives. Transparency in EU processes will enhance accountability by establishing 

unequivocal lines of responsibility within the EU apparatus and promote citizens’ participation 

in the decision-making process.

Crucially, this Act envisions a Europe where individual citizens’ interests and voices take 

centre stage, transcending the constraints of national politics. By reimagining electoral 

and parliamentary systems, it seeks to create a European democracy that is genuinely 

representative, accountable, and responsive to the needs of all its citizens.

This requires a robust European media landscape that fosters transparency and an informed 

citizenry. This act therefore promotes media independence, diversity and integrity, and takes 
measures to fight rampant disinformation in the digital age.

Volt Europe

92

93

Volt Europe

2.  Harmonized voting systems 
for European elections

3.  Voting rights in country 
of residence

.

.

.

Make voting and being elected as 

accessible as possible and make EU 

elections Europeanised, making MEPs truly 

accountable to citizens. 

Reform and harmonise the EU’s voting 

system by setting the legal voting age to 

16 and the minimum age for running for 

.

.

Make party lists of gender alternated in 

their ranking to promote gender equality in 

political representation. Establish additional 

representation goals for other minorities 

to ensure a plural and representative 

parliamentary composition.

Put in place voter education initiatives to 

candidacy to 18, proposing an EU-wide 

ensure voters are well informed about 

.

.

Give full voting rights (universal suffrage) to 

.

Grant conditional full voting rights 

EU mobile citizens. Following the principle 

following 24 months of continuous 

of “No taxation without representation”, 

residence, introduced based on reciprocity 

grant a 5th freedom to the European single 

in an opt-in process for Member States 

market: the right to choose to vote in all 

ready to advance from voting according 

elections in the country of residence.

to citizenship towards voting according to 

Expand the voting rights granted by the 

Maastricht treaty in municipal and European 

.

Ensure that the votes of the 15 million 

residency. 

single election date, and establishing 

the electoral process, their rights and 

elections to mobile EU citizens, in place 

citizens that today live in another EU 

common campaign rules and voting 

responsibilities. Establish systems to help 

since 1992, to regional, national and 

Member State than that of their country 

mechanisms. 

everyone, including people with disabilities, 

participate in the democratic process.

presidential elections.

Make gradual steps towards making the 

EU a single electoral district where voters 

choose representatives from transnational 

lists. Allow voters to cast two votes, with 

one vote electing an MEP from a single 

national district and the other from a 

Europe-wide list. Make the number of MEPs 

elected from each list as close as possible 

to the proportion of votes received. This 

excludes the use of any artificial threshold.

of origin are not lost. Not having voting 

rights in both the country of residence and 

the country of origin would mean that the 

more integrated Europe becomes, the more 

elections are tainted towards nationalism.

94

95

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT4.  Citizen participation in 
policy-making

5.  Preventing democratic 
backsliding

.

.

Establish a permanent European Citizens’ 

.

Reform of the European Citizens’ 

Assembly, made up of a rotating group of 

Initiative (ECIs), empowering citizens to 

randomly selected citizens, with rotating 

initiate policy, by lowering the number of 

membership. The Assembly would spark 

signatures required from one million to 

transnational dialogues on a broad 

500,000 and improving the online signature 

spectrum of issues, setting agendas, and 

collection. All ECIs that pass this threshold 

providing feedback on legislative proposals. 

must be deliberated in Parliament.

The resultant recommendations must be 

considered in relevant policy discussions. 

.

Make sustainability protected as a core 

European value, to be added to the existing 

Establish the Conference on the Future of 

protection of democracy, justice, rule 

Europe as a recurring event, strengthening 

of law, human dignity, human rights and 

its role in shaping our future and that of 

equality.

future generations.

.

.

Accelerate infringement procedures 

.

Treat and address whole-of-society threats, 

tailored for situations with an immediate 

such as hybrid threats (e.g., disinformation), 

threat to democratic values, human rights, 

under a unified strategic deterrent 

or the rule of law, ensuring the EU can 

framework (Act 2, Proposal 7).

put an end to EU law violations promptly 

through robust mechanisms to protect our 

foundational values. 

Put in place early warning systems that 

trigger preemptive steps to address the 

situation before further escalations.

96

97

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT6.  Fighting corruption

7.  Lobbying regulations

.

.

Strengthen existing anti-corruption 

.

Create a more ambitious EU Ethics Body 

instruments and mechanisms, such as the 

that serves as a dedicated watchdog to 

European Union Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) 

investigate and adjudicate cases of ethical 

and the European Public Prosecutor’s Office 

misconduct, conflicts of interest, and 

(EPPO). Corruption is a seed that yields 

breaches of integrity within EU institutions.

mistrust that needs to be uprooted. 

Enhance transparency by providing 

detailed and comprehensible reports on 

the allocation and use of funds assigned 

to EU elected officials and supporting the 

disclosure of incomes and assets for all 

elected EU officials. 

.

.

Increase the “cooling off” time between 

.

Create transparency by ensuring EU 

working for EU institutions and the private 

Parliamentarians and officials publish their 

sector from 6 months to 12 months, to close 

assets and by obliging lobbyists to register 

the “revolving door” that allows unchecked 

meetings with EU officials in a centralised, 

and direct access by corporate lobbyists to 

publicly available platform

influence EU policy.  

Make the EU Transparency Register 

mandatory and introduce a legally binding 

code of conduct, building on the current 

response to Qatargate.

98

99

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT8.  Safety and protection 
of journalists 

9.  European Broadcasting
agencies

.

Enact robust anti-SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit 

Against Public Participation) laws to deter 

powerful individuals or entities from filing 

baseless lawsuits against journalists with 

the sole intent of silencing or bankrupting 

them, thus protecting journalists and their 

role in holding power accountable. 

.

.

Establish rapid response mechanisms at the 

EU level to provide immediate assistance 

to journalists facing threats or violence, 

including legal aid, temporary relocations, 

and security services.

Strengthen and expand protections for 

whistleblowers, who often collaborate with 

journalists to expose wrongdoing.

.

.

Support the creation of a strong network 

.

Establish a European Netflix as a European 

of European public broadcasters, building 

broadcaster, combining access to all media 

on experiences from corporations like EBU, 

produced with public money across the 

ARTE and 3sat, functioning as forums for 

union. Establish a TV programme under 

all European public broadcasters to share 

the auspices of the broadcaster. Abolish 

information and best practices, while 

geoblocking.

also facilitating the exchange of national 

content. This will ensure that information is 

not limited to specific areas.

Offer financial support to encourage 

European Broadcast agencies to provide 

translated content from national services 

across multiple channels, including radio, 

television, and the Internet. This also allows 

for better reporting on important issues 

and discussions on the European level. 

100

101

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT10. Transparency, 
accountability and informed 
decision-making

.

Ensure wider access to public data that 

encompasses statistics, research, geospatial 

data and all other kinds of public data, 

as well as governmental decision-making 

information on all levels of government 

within the EU, such as voting records, 

debates, financial information and decision 

.

.

Integrate and extend existing open 

data dashboards and public information 

platforms to take on the citizen’s 

perspective by providing accessible tools 

optimised for their user experience.

Harmonise legislation so that commercial 

memos, unless an exemption for security or 

registries of Member States will publish 

confidentiality is necessary.

annual reports on private enterprises free 

of charge.

11. Open-source software

.

.

.

Release software components funded by 

.

Treat open-source solutions as a 

public resources under a free/libre and 

deciding factor, on par with accessibility, 

open-source software (FLOSS) licence to 

functionality, and usability, when 

ensure transparency and to enable the 

considering software products for public 

use and adaptation of the software and its 

services and operations. In cases where 

source code by the broad public for both 

new software components are developed 

private and commercial use.

using public funds, the software must be 

published under a FLOSS licence.

Pave the way for initiatives analogous 

to the Open Technology Fund, the Open 

.

Place the burden of liability of open-

Collective or the Sovereign Tech Fund, that 

source software components onto those 

help generate funding for open digital 

commercially deploying (e.g. integrators) 

technologies, such as widely used open-

the software and require the stakeholders 

source software that serves as a critical 

who benefit the most from this deployment 

component in software products and 

to ensure CE compliance of the software 

services many Europeans use.

(excluding end consumers).

Cultivate a financially sustainable 

ecosystem that reduces our dependency 

on precarious volunteer efforts for key 

software libraries and infrastructure, 

utilised by both the public and private 

sectors.

102

103

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT 
12. Strengthening Euroregions

How we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 

.

Strengthen Euroregions across the EU:

.

.

.

Recognise that cross-border 

collaborations show a great variety 

in how they work and are pivotal in 

shaping a truly federal Europe. Around 

30% of the people living in the EU live 

in one of the 152 active Euroregions.

Place focused attention to bring 

Euroregions closer to the national and 

regional governments. The current 

organisation of the Euroregions shows 

a differentiation in the goals they seek 

to achieve and the themes they work 

on, their legal status and their funding.

Develop policies that make the 

organisation of funding of these 

regions more transparent. Allow 

citizens to actively participate in 

the decision-making process for 

Euroregions. Promote a coherent 

policy approach across the EU.

The European Democracy Act comprises 

clear campaign financing rules, individual 

11 Moonshot policies, which strengthen 

membership and joint financing. Additionally, 

democratic rules for the European political 

a legally binding Code of Conduct should be 

parties including lobbying regulations, 

introduced for EU policymakers to increase 

increasing citizens’ participation in the 

transparency of the actions taken by EU 

policymaking processes, fighting corruption 

policymakers and the reasoning behind them. 

and hindering a  democratic backslide of  

A refinement of the existing rules regulating 

Member States, strengthening the protection 

lobbying in the Rule of Procedure of the 

of journalists and fighting disinformation as 

European Parliament (2019), such as Rules 11 

well as illegal data sharing.

and 35, is also necessary. To tackle corruption 

The proposed policies require adapting primary 

effectively, the European Union Anti-Fraud 

EU legislation. Based on amending Art. 11 

Office (OLAF) Regulation No 883/2013 must 

TEU, Volt wants to encourage and facilitate 

be amended to vest more investigative and 

citizens’ participation through a reform of the 

enforcement powers to the institution. 

European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) to allow for 

Moreover, the Commission’s proposal for an 

easier citizen participation. Moreover, Article 

EU Ethics Body must be realized by amending 

7 TEU procedure, which allows the Council to 

Article 13 TEU to include this institution. 

suspend certain rights, including voting rights, 

Furthermore, a more democratic and 

of a Member State when in breach of EU values, 

transparent Union also requires the protection 

forms a vital part of the European Democracy 

of journalists, which may be realized through 

Act. This is why, for serious and persistent 

the enactment of the proposed Directive aimed 

breaches, an accelerated infringement 

at addressing abusive lawsuits called ‘SLAPPs’. 

procedure against the Member State in 

Additionally, the Whistleblower Directive (EU) 

breach is necessary based on an expansion 

2019/1937 must be amended to provide more 

of the stated provision. The existing Rules of 

protection for whistleblowers who collaborate 

Procedure of the European Parliament (Chapter 

with journalists to expose wrongdoing.

4, Title I) need to be amended to establish 

104

105

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNTHow we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 

.

To simplify ethical regulations, the ethics 

body should replace other existing bodies 

European Broadcasting Agency
.

To serve the goals in both Article 165 

for the EU, creating a clear authority for 

(education) and 167 (culture) of the TFEU, 

ethical matters.

and within the Creative Europe Programme, 

Corruption
.

To address issues of financial impropriety, 

the EU must adopt incentive measures 

to facilitate exchanges of information 

between national news agencies and 

empower OLAF with enhanced investigative 

outlets, by, among other things, translating 

The European Democracy Act comprises 

lobbying in the Rule of Procedure of the 

authority in these matters. 

11 Moonshot policies, which strengthen 

European Parliament (2019), such as Rules 11 

democratic rules for the European political 

and 35, is also necessary. To tackle corruption 

parties including lobbying regulations, 

effectively, the European Union Anti-Fraud 

Lobbying regulations
.

Refine the existing lobbying regulations 

.

The platform will give special attention 

national content and establishing a 

European Broadcasting Platform. 

increasing citizens’ participation in the 

Office (OLAF) Regulation No 883/2013 must 

outlined in the Rules of Procedure of the 

to improving knowledge of European 

policymaking processes, fighting corruption 

be amended to vest more investigative and 

European Parliament and enhance the 

culture, history, and diversity, and serve as 

and hindering a  democratic backslide of  

enforcement powers to the institution. 

criteria in the Transparency Register.

a platform for artistic and literary creation 

Member States, strengthening the protection 

Moreover, the Commission’s proposal for an 

of journalists and fighting disinformation as 

EU Ethics Body must be realized by amending 

well as illegal data sharing.

Article 13 TEU to include this institution. 

Furthermore, a more democratic and 

The proposed policies require adapting primary 

transparent Union also requires the protection 

EU legislation. Based on amending Art. 11 

of journalists, which may be realized through 

TEU, Volt wants to encourage and facilitate 

the enactment of the proposed Directive aimed 

citizens’ participation through a reform of the 

at addressing abusive lawsuits called ‘SLAPPs’. 

European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) to allow for 

Additionally, the Whistleblower Directive (EU) 

easier citizen participation. Moreover, Article 

2019/1937 must be amended to provide more 

7 TEU procedure, which allows the Council to 

protection for whistleblowers who collaborate 

suspend certain rights, including voting rights, 

with journalists to expose wrongdoing.

of a Member State when in breach of EU values, 

forms a vital part of the European Democracy 

Act. This is why, for serious and persistent 

EU Ethics Body
.

Whilst the European Commission has 

breaches, an accelerated infringement 

presented a proposal for the creation of an 

procedure against the Member State in 

interinstitutional Ethics Body, this proposal 

and exchange.

.

Introduce measures that deter unchecked 

access, make registration mandates 

more stringent, and establish firm legal 

frameworks to ensure ethical conduct.

Protection of journalists
.

Review the proposed SLAPPs Directive 

aimed at addressing abusive lawsuits 

that target journalists and human rights 

defenders and ensure that it contains 

adequate safeguards to protect individuals 

and organisations who defend fundamental 

rights, including environmental and climate 

rights, women’s rights, LGBTIQ rights, 

disability rights, the rights of minority racial 

or ethnic groups, labour rights, and religious 

breach is necessary based on an expansion 

lacks ambition. Rather than having its 

freedoms. 

of the stated provision. The existing Rules of 

members be predominantly representatives 

Procedure of the European Parliament (Chapter 

of different EU institutions, the Ethics body 

4, Title I) need to be amended to establish 

should be presided over by independent 

clear campaign financing rules, individual 

ethical experts. 

membership and joint financing. Additionally, 

a legally binding Code of Conduct should be 

.

In addition to providing guidance 

introduced for EU policymakers to increase 

recommendations, the ethics body should 

transparency of the actions taken by EU 

receive investigating and sanctioning 

policymakers and the reasoning behind them. 

powers in all areas to which it has purview.

A refinement of the existing rules regulating 

.

The Directive should cover all individuals 

involved in public participation in matters 

of public interest. Volt is actively working 

at the European level to strengthen these 

rules and will explore the introduction of 

further measures that safeguard media 

independence at the European level.

106

107

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS MAKING VOTES COUNT 
EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS
MAKING VOTES COUNT 

EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 10.540.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 1.440.000.000 and 

the annual costs are € 1.820.000.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

campaigns.

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

running of the proposed policies.

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

9. Climate 
Transition Act

The danger and threat posed by climate change is undeniable. There is overwhelming 

evidence that human-made climate change leads to a destabilisation of weather patterns 

and the collapse of ecosystems. The human and economic cost of adapting to these negative 

consequences rises exponentially with every additional degree of global warming. It is well 

established that the only path toward mitigating climate change is the rapid and complete 

elimination of greenhouse gas emissions. Yet, despite this clear political imperative, robust 

and ambitious climate policies are lacking on many fronts due to strongly established interests 

working against the transition. 

Still, we must acknowledge the steps taken by the 2015 Paris Agreement as a diplomatic 

breakthrough in the fight against climate change. Almost all countries committed to limiting 

global warming to 2°C, aiming for 1.5°C, through strict and continuously reported nationally 

determined contributions (NDCs). This sets the groundwork for continuing to push for an 

ambitious climate agenda and adding layers of international climate policy such as the creation 

of a Loss & Damage fund.

The EU has implemented and proposed various policies to reach net-zero emissions by 2050, 

the latest being the “European Green Deal” with the “Fit for 55” legislation. This was a big step 

forward, but still not ambitious enough to be in line with the Paris Agreement. 

Volt is strongly committed to ensuring that European policies are in line with the Paris 

Agreement and that the EU does its fair share of staying within the 1.5-°C scenario of global 

warming.

The CO2 reductions we can achieve by 2030 are crucial and of the highest priority. We will 

therefore push for an additional climate emergency legislation package that pushes for CO2 

reductions until 2030 as much as possible.

More importantly, climate change is developing along with large injustices. The richest 10% of 

Europeans emit over three times more greenhouse gases (GHGs) per capita than the rest, while 

those who have contributed the least are likely to be the most affected by its devastating 

consequences and associated policies through higher food and energy prices. Policies must 

account for their disproportionate effects on different parts of society and introduce climate 

reparations and adaptation support as a fundamental part.

Volt Europe

108
108

109

Volt Europe

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSMAKING VOTES COUNT EU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS 
LIVEABLE PLANET

1.  Setting ambitious targets 
to meet the Paris Agreement

.

.

.

Define the overall CO2e maximum budget 

for the EU that is in line with the 1.5 

°C global warming scenario and takes 

into account the EU’s responsibility and 

capabilities. Make sure all legislation is in 

line with that maximum budget.

Initiate a climate emergency legislation 

.

.

.

Aim for net climate neutrality of the EU in 

2040.

Foster public-private investment via a new 

EU Climate Investment Platform, which 

would be an extension of InvestEU.

Boost the Net-Zero Industry Act through 

package to reduce greenhouse gas 

EU funding and provide greater financial 

emissions by 80% by 2030 compared to 

resources to create a level playing field on 

2019.

the global stage. 

Work towards climate neutrality in energy 

production and use by 2035.

While the EU only represents 6.9% of global GHG emissions and around 5% of the population, 

it holds significant influence in international trade due to its consumption patterns and EU 

standards on products entering its borders. The current members of the EU are responsible for 

17.3% of the global historic greenhouse gas emissions. It is therefore vital that the EU not only 

considers the decarbonisation of its modes of production but also its consumption and impact 

on global supply chains. Member States must also be given the technology and funding needed 

to decarbonise their electrical grid and transportation and convert to greener forms of energy.

Our Climate Transition Act focuses on reducing emissions as fast as possible and takes a 

holistic approach to a complex issue. It pairs novel interventions with specific measures 

targeting the largest emitting sectors, transportation, energy supply and industry. The Climate 

Transition Act protects and strengthens European Competitiveness. The green transition 

offers a vast opportunity for the EU’s economy, since through public and private investment 

we can stimulate growth, create jobs, and place the EU as a global leader in green technologies 

and climate policy.

110

111111

Volt Europe

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET.

.

.

Support legally binding treaties for 

planned climate migration, aiming 

to prevent conflicts and preserve 

lifestyles.

Explore circular economy principles 

in policy reform, focusing on waste 

reduction, material retention, and 

natural ecosystem regeneration in 

adaptation plans.

Support local, national and effective 

cross-border deposit and lending 

systems for reusable packaging, 

bottles and cans that are eventually 

recognised across Europe.

.

Extend the Innovation and Social 

Climate Funds and direct funds toward 

disadvantaged communities and innovative 

industries.

2.  Just transition without 
harmful subsidies

.

.

.

.

.

Extend the Emissions Trading System 

.

Maintain the high share of the total 

(ETS) to include negative emissions, and 

revenues generated by the EU ETS used 

to cover at least 90% (2021 ca. 40%) of all 

for climate- and energy-related purposes 

EU carbon emissions under a single cap by 

(est. 75% between 2013 and 2021) while 

the end of 2025 at the latest. This means 

ensuring that these revenues are also used 

expediting the introduction of the planned 

to support low-income communities, as well 

ETS 2, covering buildings, road transport 

as those most heavily impacted by climate 

and additional small industries, as well as 

change (‘carbon dividends’, i.e., direct 

including emissions from industrial animal 

cash payments to citizens, have proven a 

farming. Reduce the number of allowances 

successful best practice in Switzerland and 

(scope-adjusted) in line with Volt’s 

Canada).

reduction targets.

.

Ensure that the transitions include 

Extend the Industrial Emissions Directive 

adaptation strategies that allow 

(IED) to all types of industrial animal 

communities to increase their adaptive 

farming, applying to holdings that contain 

capacity. We strongly advocate for 

the number of animals deemed relevant by 

consistent and binding climate impact 

science.

adaptation measures:

Introduce a carbon tax for any sectors 

where an expanded ETS would cause 

disproportionate administrative effort 

(e.g., highly fragmented industries that can 

hardly be captured upstream).

Support the final implementation of 

a robust carbon border adjustment 

mechanism (CBAM).

Ensure proper taxation of kerosene and 

.

.

.

Strengthen flood defences and 

coordinate adaptation plans in 

vulnerable European coastal areas.

Expand the European Civil Protection 

and Humanitarian Aid Operations 

to prepare for an increasing and 

intensifying number of natural 

disasters.

Develop a strategy for insurance 

other fossil fuels as part of the wider 

underwriters and risk management, 

strategy towards a just transition that 

ensuring long-term protection 

provides clear and accountable targets for 

assessments and funding for climate-

ending subsidies for fossil fuels.

resilient infrastructure.

112

113

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET3.  Sustainability Disclosure and 
Consumer Empowerment

4.  Holistic climate governance

.

.

Ensure the transparent reporting of all 

climate-relevant externalities of products 

and services, empowering consumers to 

make more sustainable choices.

Extend the Corporate Sustainability 

Reporting Directive to include an end-

customer component. This will require 

companies to establish transparency for 

.

.

Create an EU-wide sustainability index, 

similar to the existing ones for the 

efficiency of domestic appliances and 

houses, that considers the complete 

environmental footprint of products and 

rates it on a simple scale that translates its 

impact on sustainability.

Enforce the use of this objective sustainably 

.

.

Embed climate mitigation and adaptation 

.

Give greater emphasis to the impact 

considerations into every sphere of 

on vulnerable communities and include 

policymaking to ensure consistency and 

contingency strategies in long-term policies.

coordination across all aspects of climate 

change that impact our lives. 

Improve cross-functional collaboration, 

fast-tracking climate-relevant legislation 

and taking a risk management approach to 

individual products and services on GHG 

index as one of the criteria used on all 

climate policy. 

footprint, recyclability, environmental 

public procurement across member states.

impact, and other metrics at the point of 

sale.

114

115

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET5.  Negative emissions 
strategy

6.  Low-carbon 
transport sector                               

.

Commit to a Climate Neutral Economy by 

2040 (Energy sector by 2035), aiming for 

a negative emission capacity. Ensure the 

protection, restoration and growth of natural 

carbon sinks that are vital to achieve this:

Increase efforts in sustainable 

forest management, restoration and 

afforestation.

.

.

.

Spearheaded a coherent strategy to 

leverage scientific knowledge, cross-

country collaboration, and design 

appropriate economic incentives. 

Launch large-scale European research 

programs on carbon sequestration 

methods, both artificial and biological.

Bring an end to harmful subsidies and 

Push for conservation and restoration 

ensure proper taxation of fossil fuels.

of wetlands.

Replace current subsidies for 

unsustainable agricultural practices 

with subsidies to promote the quick 

adoption of eco-friendly practices that 

are known or under development (e.g. 

perennial and polyculture agricultural 

production systems).

Promote the diversification of crop 

species that have a very high rate of 

carbon sequestration per unit of area 

and time and constitute a source of 

sustainable raw materials for a variety 

of value-added products, such as hemp 

and bamboo.

Increase the number of protected 

wildlife areas, as per the UN 

biodiversity plan.

Improve the protection and health of 

European waterways.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Strengthen and expand the rail system in 

Europe, since more than 20% of CO2 in the 

EU originates from transport, be it from 

road transport (72% of total) or aviation 

(14%), while rail makes up only 0.4% of 

carbon emissions:

Harmonise infrastructure across 

Europe, in particular about the 

European Train Control System (ETCS), 

platform height, track gauge and the 

approval of railway vehicles.

.

.

.

.

.

Promote and subsidise an EU-wide MaaS 

(Mobility as a Service) Platform aiming to 

provide seamless, affordable, and eco-

friendly transportation options, making it 

easier to transition away from private car 

ownership. 

Ban the use of fossil fuels in road vehicles 

by 2035. This does not ban the sale or use 

of internal combustion engines as long as 

they burn biofuels or synfuels.

Abolish taxation exemptions on aircraft 

Propose considerable EU-wide 

fuel and increase efforts to achieve net 

investments and subsidies on all 

zero emissions in European international 

levels of rail transportation, such as 

and domestic aviation by 2040 through the 

integrated long- and medium-distance 

Aviation Advisory Council (ACARE).

railway networks for goods and 

passengers, a European High-Speed 

Rail (HSR) network, and regional and 

local public transport. Expand and 

improve national and international 

night train services as a convenient 

alternative to air travel.

Empower the proposed European Transport 

Authority (ETA, see Thriving Together Act) 

with consultative legislative authority and 

financial resources to oversee investments 

in cross-border and high-speed rail 

infrastructure across Europe and to push 

innovation and sustainability in the aviation 

and shipping industries.

116

117

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET7.  Renewable Energy 
Systems

.

Prepare a differentiated, European 

strategy that prioritises decarbonization, 

ensures safety, introduces a nuclear waste 

disposal concept, and promotes research 

and development, seizing long-term 

opportunities:

.

Promote changes in the energy supply 

.

Promote functional and efficient renewable 

mix and enforce alternative and carbon-

energy systems by counteracting the 

free sources of energy, transitioning to a 

increased volatility on the generation side 

sustainable European system and achieving 

caused by these fundamental changes 

full decarbonization of the energy system 

to the energy supply mix. To that effect, 

by 2035: 

introduce flexibility measures:

.

.

Promote the total phase-out of coal 

by 2030 (lignite by 2025), prohibit 

new permits to drill for fossil fuels, 

and eliminate flaring immediately. 

In addition, ensure that 80% of all 

known fossil fuel reserves are left in 

the ground. Prohibit the advertising of 

fossil fuel products, similar to bans on 

cigarette advertisements. 

Promote a diversified portfolio of 

renewable energy sources (RES). 

.

.

.

Leverage the flexibility on the demand 

side by promoting the necessary 

technical solutions (digital monitoring 

and control systems) and business 

models (e.g. aggregation-based 

models such as virtual power plants).

Deploy storage solutions for 

leveraging short-term (intraday) to 

long-term (seasonal) flexibility.

Promote smart planning and operation 

To enable a mix of intermittent and 

of infrastructure for improving the 

mutually complementing sustainable 

connectivity between generation and 

energy sources, promote further 

research on geothermal energy, 

consumption hubs, thus leveraging the 

flexibility of a large interconnected 

alongside research on ocean thermal 

system.

energy conversion, tidal and wave 

energy, residual heat from industry, 

.

Eliminate existing sectoral silos and 

biomass, and new designs for 

strengthen cross-sectoral links (electricity, 

solar and wind energy. Promote 

gas, heating & cooling, mobility, waste, 

research in alternative technologies, 

water) through technologies, business, 

including low-carbon and disruptive 

regulatory and governance models, in 

technologies such as sustainable 

line with the EU’s Strategy for Energy 

chemistry concepts, bio-based 

System Integration, thus achieving the 

solutions, and organic and plastic 

decarbonization of the entire energy 

waste-to-fuel concepts, with particular 

system and not only of the electricity 

emphasis on large-scale applications.

system.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Foster building new infrastructures to 

allow the production of millions of tons 

of low-carbon hydrogen by 2040, which 

can contribute to the decarbonisation of 

European industry and transport systems 

without financially disturbing them.

Replace the use of natural gas by 

Allow existing reactors to continue 

operating in their current form until 

households with as much biogas as possible 

the agreed-upon end of their lifecycle. 

in the short and medium term. Produce the 

Ensure that runtime extensions 

biogas in the EU with innovative methods 

are permitted only if: (1) all safety 

and convey it to households via the same 

regulations valid at the time of 

gas transport infrastructure. Introduce price 

the decision are met; (2) long-term 

caps for EU biogas.

operations are performed at the full 

cost of the operator; (3) the latest 

level of technological advancements at 

the time of the evaluation is achieved; 

(4) the reactor is needed to ensure 

climate neutrality. 

Allow the building and operation of 

already approved reactors under the 

respective agreed-upon contractual 

obligations.

Allow new reactors only if they are 

inherently safe (no active safety 

systems are required to bring the 

operation into a safe state of shut-

down) and robust against outside 

influences.

Promote research and support the 

adoption of advanced nuclear fission 

and fusion concepts, such as thorium 

cycles, molten salt, liquid-metal, 

Gen4, fast breeder, or small modular 

reactors.

118

119

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET.

.

 Improve the security of supply by 

removing the temporary nature of 

capacity mechanisms.

Strengthen consumer protection 

by shielding consumers from price 

spikes and boosting retail market 

competition.

8. Improved electricity 
market 

.

Adopt reforms that promote an effective 

operation of tools to accommodate 

electricity market as a prerequisite for a 

the flexibility needed locally (e.g., 

successful transition to renewable energy 

local flexibility markets, aggregator 

systems:

business models).

.

.

Ensure that the market’s original goals 

.

Account for the new framework 

can still be achieved by a different or 

conditions, which are mainly driven 

improved market design. First, ensure 

by three factors: decentralisation 

a high level of market competition 

(reallocation and fragmentation of 

on the supply side, through effective 

generation and flexibility resources), 

unbundling regulations and facilitated 

digitalisation (improved monitoring 

supplier switching for consumers. 

and control), and subsequent 

Second, ensure that there are enough 

democratisation (more energy 

incentives for the investments in new 

resources at citizen and local levels 

generation and infrastructure needed 

that empower these local agents to 

to implement renewable energy 

become more active participants of 

systems. Third, maintain an effective 

energy systems).

economic dispatch of generation 

and flexibility resources to cover the 

.

Propose a transitional period to account 

energy demand at all times. To enable 

for the complexity of the identification and 

this, increase cross-border trading 

implementation of such far-reaching reform 

capacities and allow more dynamic 

measures. Introduce short-term, possibly 

trading (e.g., decreasing minimum 

temporary measures that address issues in 

product volumes and trading times).

need of urgent action. Follow the general 

approach adopted by the Commission and 

Enhance the design to incorporate 

approved by the Council:

the new market goals, providing 

incentives for the deployment and 

.

Improve investment conditions 

effective operation of mechanisms for 

for renewable energy sources by 

flexibility (storage and demand side 

broadening the use of Contracts for 

management). Improve established 

Difference and promoting the uptake 

centralised markets and introduce 

of Power Purchase Agreements.

decentralised market-driven solutions 

that enable the deployment and 

120

121

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET9. Energy system resilience 
and security of supply

10. Low carbon-emitting 
energy sources

.

Reevaluate the scope and the standards of 

European energy systems’ resilience and 

security of supply, to:

.

Ensure that improved European 

Resource Adequacy Assessments 

suitably include new options to 

guarantee resource adequacy, 

.

.

Prioritise measures for guaranteeing 

resource adequacy that lower the 

dependence on regions outside the EU.

Promote resilience standards over 

absolute security standards about the 

energy system’s digital infrastructure, 

building on the EU’s action plan for 

such as storage and demand-side 

Digitising the Energy System.

management, and properly account 

for the non-uniform levels of 

adequacy between bidding zones 

due to structural constraints in the 

transmission networks.

.

Remove intricate regulatory hurdles in the 

process of obtaining permits for new low-

carbon emitting energy plants, which can 

take several years, pushing for the quick 

conclusion stipulated in the EU Renewable 

Energy Directive:

.

.

Improve certification and validation 

processes for nuclear installations and 

generalise them for all countries of the EU 

with nuclear energy in their program. This 

avoids unnecessary duplication of identical 

procedures in different countries.

Facilitate and coordinate European 

.

.

.

.

.

Streamline and harmonise 

administrative procedures and reduce 

initiatives for full recycling of used nuclear 

bureaucratic complexities.

fuel and accelerate deployment of nuclear 

waste recycling technologies. This greatly 

Improve administrative frameworks for 

reduces the volume of nuclear waste and 

permitting and offer capacity-building 

the time that it needs to be stored.

support to enhance efficiency and 

effectiveness.

Identify and disseminate best practices 

to foster mutual learning and optimise 

permitting processes.

Facilitate spatial planning by creating 

low-carbon energy zoning maps and 

implementing participatory processes 

to ensure sustainable land use.

Increase public engagement by 

empowering communities to partake 

in the ownership and benefits of low-

carbon energy development, as well 

as ensuring participation from low-

income and vulnerable households.

122

123

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET11. Energy communities and 
decentralized energy systems

12. Sustainable buildings

.

Harmonise national regulations that 

.

Ensure Member States have equal access 

empower consumers to actively engage 

to available support programs, levelling the 

in all energy markets, either individually 

playing field with larger participants.

or as part of citizen energy communities. 

This would encompass activities such 

as electricity generation, consumption, 

sharing, and sales, as well as offering 

flexibility services through demand-

response and storage solutions. This 

aims to enhance the adoption of energy 

communities and streamline the integration 

of citizens into the electricity system as 

active participants.

.

.

.

.

Promote the replacement of individual 

fossil-fueled heating and cooling 

installations with alternatives such as 

renewably powered electric heating, heat 

pumps, and solar water heating.

Promote better energy efficiency (e.g., 

insulation, energy-saving appliances, 

behavioural change) and the use of 

.

.

Enable owners of homes and offices 

to make the necessary investments by 

harmonising and increasing public financing 

and by offering direct low-interest financing 

from the European Investment Bank (EIB). 

Raise awareness and engage citizens about 

the possibilities of green buildings.

Encourage the development of a properly 

sustainable building materials when 

sized and well-qualified retrofit industry 

constructing or renovating buildings.

through training, labour mobility, and best 

practice sharing.

Set near-zero energy building (nZEB) 

standards for all new buildings in the EU 

by 2030 and net zero emissions for all 

buildings (including existing building stock) 

by 2035.

Develop standards for resource-efficient 

design and integrated construction 

processes. Measure the efficiency of 

building design with both the annual “in-

use” energy and the carbon footprint of the 

overall construction process (differentiating 

between “Operational Carbon” and 

“Embodied Carbon”). Promote mapping 

buildings by continual energy performance 

data to allow consensus on the meaning of 

sustainable design and access to accurate 

measurement of “Whole Life Carbon” within 

the building lifecycle.

124

125

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANETHow we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

Volt’s  Climate Transition Act touches on the 

amended to call more for the stark disparities 

Directives and Regulations falling under the 

in greenhouse gas emissions within Europe to 

European Great Deal, Net Zero Emissions 

be addressed as these are clear inequalities 

by 2050, and Just Transition Mechanism 

(i.e., the wealthiest 10% emit over three times 

initiatives.  The Act, notably comprised of 11 

more per capita than others). At the same 

Moonshot policies, which advocate for climate 

time, Volt acknowledges the Directive (EU) 

neutrality across various facets of climate 

2018/2001 pertaining to Renewable Energy 

policy, decarbonization, energy transition, 

Directive II and adds to the already existing 

and sustainable development, necessitates 

legislation the idea that decarbonisation should 

modifications within the purview of the 

take place not only at the production level 

following three central legislative instruments: 

but also at the consumptions level and across 

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 446.782.500.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 261.430.000.000 

and the annual costs are € 37.070.500.000.

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 on EU Climate 

global supply chains.  Another impact on the 

campaigns.

Law, Directive (EU) 2018/2001 pertaining to 

already existing legislation that few of the 

Renewable Energy Directive II, and Directive 

Moonshot policies have on the Directive (EU) 

(EU) 2022/2464 concerning Corporate 

2022/2464 concerning Corporate Sustainability 

Sustainability Reporting, among others falling 

Reporting as there is a clear emphasis on the 

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

under the initiatives mentioned.

fact that there should be more focus within the 

running of the proposed policies.

The Moonshot policies impact the already 

transition brings in terms of economic growth, 

existing legislation by suggesting new 

job creation, green transition and climate 

Articles drafted on the opportunities the green 

innovative ways through which crucial matters 

policy.

can be remediated. For instance, Regulation 

(EU) 2021/1119 on EU Climate Law needs to be 

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

total income.

126

127

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET10. Healthy 
Ecosystems Act

The environmental crisis we confront extends beyond climate change. It encompasses 

widespread pollution, biodiversity depletion, and the destruction of our natural habitats. These 

Moving towards a more sustainable agricultural sector, in collaboration with our farmers, is 

issues are not isolated. They are interconnected symptoms of our unsustainable production 

critical for the green transition. Small and medium farmers are being squeezed by exploitative 

and consumption patterns and the exceeding of planetary boundaries.

commercial relations and this is reflected in the decrease of farms in Europe. We envisage a 

policy reform that promotes better livelihoods for farmers, intergenerational renewal, and 

To effectively address these multifaceted environmental challenges, we require a 

stimulates local economies. Rewarding farmers who work in harmony with nature is essential 

comprehensive ‘One Health’ approach and the involvement of all actors. It is essential to 

for creating a green future and safeguarding Europe’s strategic autonomy. The need for change 

acknowledge that tackling climate change is inseparable from preserving vital natural 

extends to our forest and our ocean policy.

ecosystems, which serve as carbon sinks and the foundation of our food supply. Furthermore, 

the degradation of these ecosystems renders us more vulnerable to rising natural disasters like 

These actions collectively fortify the development of resilient and sustainable communities, 

floods and wildfires, which are already on the rise at an alarming rate.

ensuring they are endowed with accessible green spaces that augment human well-

being, improve animal welfare, and combat antimicrobial resistance, underscoring the 

Our impact on the environment affects planetary health and is intimately linked to human 

interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health, to the benefit of public 

health. Increasing pollution, spanning from air pollution to land and ocean contamination, 

health, the well-being of present and future generations, and all living organisms on this 

exacts a mounting toll on our well-being and places additional burdens on our already 

planet.

stretched healthcare systems. Overcoming short-term thinking is imperative.

Rather than viewing the natural world as something to be subdued and exploited at any 

cost, we must recognize that a harmonised coexistence is the only way to continue life on 

this planet. There are subsidies for harmful and polluting activities, supporting intensive 

animal farming and unsustainable deforestation, overuse of antimicrobials, overfishing, 

and unsustainable consumption patterns. This is what we currently witness - and it strongly 

motivates us to act. 

Following the principle of public money for public goods, our view is that EU funds should focus 

on funding desirable practices and phasing out harmful subsidies and policies. 

We must empower consumers to foster choices that are more sustainable and promote circular 

consumption patterns to safeguard our natural world and its ecosystems. At the same time, 

other food chain actors must be engaged.

128

129

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET1. Nature Restoration Law 

2.  Ocean ecosystems

.

Align the Nature Restoration Law (NRL) 

.

Pursue a One Health approach by attaining 

with environmental science, also taking 

World Health Organization (WHO) 

note of the World Health Organization 

guidelines involves maintaining strict air 

(WHO) guidelines on air pollution, 

quality standards to guarantee everyone’s 

residential green space, chemicals, and 

right and freedom to breathe clean air, 

noise; and establish ambitious targets for 

limiting long-term exposure to pollutants 

all natural areas in need of restoration:

like PM2.5 and NO2 across Europe, ensuring 

.

.

.

.

Re-wet at least 30% of EU peatlands by 

µg/m³ NO2. 

levels do not exceed 5 µg/m³ PM2.5 and 10 

2030.

.

Enforcing a thorough ban on chemicals 

Convert at least 10% of urban areas 

scientifically proven to harm human and 

into green and blue spaces (open 

environmental health is crucial.

streams, rivers, ponds and lakes) by 

2040, and at least 15% by 2050, and 

protect them legally.

Extend the NRL to include the habitats 

of fish species that are in critical state.

Set the target for at least 10% of 

each farm to be dedicated to nature 

restoration by 2030.

.

.

.

.

Phase-out the use of fishing gear that 

has an undesired negative impact on 

ecosystems, such as the destruction of 

corals and catch of unintended species 

(bycatch); destructive practices, such 

as bottom trawling, starting in marine 

protected areas (MPAs); and harmful 

subsidies, particularly fuel tax exemption.

Adjust fishing quotas according to the 

recommendations put forward by the 

International Council for the Exploration 

of the Sea (ICES), which officially informs 

the decision-making process. Promote 

.

.

.

Support only sustainable aquaculture. EU 

funds must only be directed towards truly 

sustainable aquaculture practices, and 

policies in parallel must work to effectively 

bring back overall food consumption 

patterns to sustainable levels.

Reinforce legislation concerning 

aquaculture and its effluents and waste 

to prevent disruptive nutrient gradients, 

supporting a sustainable, circular, and 

biodiversity-friendly form of aquaculture.

Create an action plan to boost the 

transparency and accountability over the 

sustainable production of algae and 

closed-door Council meetings that define 

promote the innovative use of products 

the final quotas set by Member-states, 

made with this protein. Europe consumes 

often exceeding the advised limits. 

large quantities of algae, yet 97% of global 

production comes from Asia. There is a clear 

Support small-scale fisheries by providing 

opportunity for strategic autonomy, which 

fair incentives under the Common Fisheries 

can be fulfilled by setting realistic enablers 

Policy (CFP) and enabling their effective 

for the algae sector to take off, including 

participation in the political decision-

funding, investment in R&D, and raising 

making process, as they play a vital role 

consumer awareness and acceptance of 

in the livelihood of coastal communities 

algae products in the EU.

and local economies, and are known to 

have a smaller environmental impact when 

.

Support green hydrogen-powered fishing 

compared with large-scale fisheries. 

vessels to reduce fossil fuel dependence.

Support strong mechanisms and dissuasive 

penalties to tackle illegal, unreported, and 

unregulated fishing (IUU). For this, it is also 

vital to ensure effective cooperation with 

third countries to restore marine stocks and 

protect MPAs.

130
130

Volt Europe

131

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET3. Forest restoration

.

.

Promote natural carbon-capturing 

.

Improve the protection and health of 

by increasing efforts in sustainable 

European waterways by updating the Water 

forest management, restoration, and 

Framework Directive (WFD) and the Marine 

afforestation. Focus agricultural and 

Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) and 

forestry practices on emission reduction 

speeding up their implementation, as only 

and landscape preservation, aiming at pre-

40% of surface water bodies surveyed 

industrial levels of terrestrial carbon stocks 

by the European Environmental Agency 

in Europe and combating desertification.

(EEA) in 2018 were found to be in a good 

ecological state.

Push for conservation and restoration of 

wetlands. Focus on peatlands (which can 

.

Set an EU-wide action plan for the 

store twice as much carbon as forests) 

forestry sector, supporting an ecosystem-

by imposing an immediate moratorium 

based forest management approach, as 

on peat exploitation until legislation is 

reconciling nature protection with the 

strengthened to ensure its protection 

commercial use of forest resources is 

and sustainable management, in addition 

possible and needed. This approach aims 

to actively restoring already exploited 

to respect the natural cycle of forests to 

peatlands to their natural state.

the maximum possible, helping protect and 

restore the EU’s forests and leading to a 

more consistent revenue stream for forest 

owners.

4. Social reform of the 
Common Agricultural Policy

.

.

.

Support a deepened EU food market 

.

Simplify bureaucratic procedures and 

oversight, since it is an essential 

increase transparency for CAP recipients, 

commodity, to protect consumers and 

particularly small and medium farmers, 

provide stable and fair prices for farmers. 

through access to a centralised and intuitive 

Create a framework for fair retailer 

EU platform for knowledge and advice 

contracts, a mechanism for local and direct 

exchange regarding procedures, rights and 

sale schemes, and improved anti-dumping 

duties, farming practices, and for document 

measures and surveillance. Examine 

submission, in cooperation with the 

competition and pricing practices. Small and 

relevant national ministries.

medium farmers face particular challenges 

from exploitative retailer relations, 

oligopoly corporate control, and WTO price 

issues. They face high production costs and 

the longstanding wrong CAP policies, which 

hinder fairness and sustainability. 

.

.

Train the staff from the competent national 

ministries to empower them to help farmers 

with their queries adequately.

Adequately support small and medium 

farmers and provide stronger incentives for 

Support the establishment of local 

young farmers to remain in the business 

agricultural cooperatives to stabilise 

and for new entrants, particularly women, 

food prices, guarantee stable and fair 

to guarantee the intergenerational 

incomes for farmers and stimulate local 

renewal of farmers. Double from 3 to 6% 

supply chains. Set guidelines for Member-

of Member-states’ annual direct payments’ 

states to promote the establishment of 

envelope for interventions targeting 

agri-cooperatives nationally. Launch an 

generational renewal. 

EU-wide public platform for knowledge and 

information for consumers and producers.

.

Develop an exchange sub-program within 

Erasmus focusing on sustainable farming 

Adopt EU-wide measures to reduce the 

practices for apprentices, newcomers, or 

production cost for farmers and the price 

the wider farming community.

paid by consumers of healthier and more 

sustainable foods, by rebalancing the 

Common Agricultural Policy’s subsidies to 

production.

132

133

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET.

Support further research and the eventual 

inclusion of genetically modified crops 

in the production portfolio of European 

farmers. Implement these techniques to 

promote climate change resilience and to 

ensure the sustainability of food production 

and farming practices.

5. Environmental reform of the 
Common Agricultural Policy

.

.

.

Phase out subsidies to environmentally 

harmful farming practices and payments by 

a hectare of land owned and allocate them 

to desirable farming practices, supporting a 

shift to a model of regenerative agriculture, 

where sustainable and organic food, soil-

health restoration, pesticide reduction, 

.

.

Support R&D for innovative farming 

systems powered by green energy, such as 

vertical farming and hydroponics, in urban 

contexts to ensure more sustainable and 

shorter food supply chains.

Support precision farming and the 

sustainable water, and land use, reversal 

implementation of automation for farms 

of biodiversity loss and animal welfare are 

where such technology makes sense to 

strongly promoted. Guide and give financial 

reduce input dependency (like water and 

support to Farmers during this transition 

pesticides) and make farming practices 

period to guarantee their stability and 

environmentally sustainable. Promote 

income.

farmer intergenerational renewal by 

attracting highly educated individuals. 

Promote models of rural development 

that stimulate local supply chains by 

.

Create an agricultural green transition 

harmonising overarching policy fields. For 

fund to enable farmers to get low-interest 

example, an effective transport system 

loans and state liability for adaptation to 

incentivizes the fixation of people in rural 

the green transition, facilitating farmers 

areas and supports farmers and local supply 

reaching sustainability requirements. 

chains. The agricultural green transition 

Promote habitat restoration, low impact, 

also provides repopulation opportunities 

and biodiversity-friendly farming, and 

for rural areas, as it creates new green jobs 

exclude any greenwashed actions. 

and attracts qualified young people.

.

Inform the next Common Agricultural Policy 

Provide incentives for the reduction of 

reform with an ambitious and scientifically-

animals farmed, whilst limiting meat 

based action plan, mapping how the 

imports and adjusting meat demand 

sector needs to change in the future years 

with concurrent policies. Agriculture is 

to guarantee its overall sustainability. 

responsible for 10.3% of the EU’s GHG 

Reduce the burden that the frequent 

emissions and 70% of those come from 

and incomplete policy updates have on 

the animal sector. It is all about “less but 

farmers’ stability and income, and have a 

better quality” meat if we want to return 

scientifically-guided CAP.

to sustainable consumption levels while 

maintaining farmers’ profitability.

134

135

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET6. Organic and regenerative 
farming

7. Healthy and 
sustainable diets

.

.

Support the European Commission’s target 

.

Leverage the Common Agricultural 

to reduce chemical pesticide use by 50% by 

Policy’s “Eco-Schemes”, whereby many of 

2030, while stimulating the mainstreaming 

the agroecological actions proposed are 

of integrated pest management (IMP) 

common to organic farming requirements. 

practices to reduce the need for pesticides 

The organic area made up only 9.1 % of 

and supporting other agroecological 

total EU agricultural land in 2020 (5.8% in 

practices.

2012), so if the growth continues at the 

same rate as 2012-2020, the EU will only 

Provide reinforced financial incentives from 

reach 15% of organic farmland by 2031.

the Common Agricultural Policy for farm 

conversion to achieve the Green Deal target 

of 25% organic farmland by 2030.

.

.

.

.

Harmonise European policies to support a 
dietary shift to a planetary health diet, which 
is rich in plant-based foods and with fewer 

animal-source foods, conferring improved 

health and environmental benefits. 

Develop an overarching EU Action Plan to 

shape our food system and habits to reach 

nutritional and environmental scientific 

recommendations, as Denmark has recently 

done. Adapt Common Agricultural Policy 

subsidy schemes and establish consumption 

targets for the increase of plant-based food 

and decrease of animal protein.

Adapt market mechanisms for better access 

and affordability of plant-based proteins 

along the food chain, creating a level 

playing field for these foods to compete 

in the market. Rebalance the Common 

Agricultural Policy to favour products that 

are not emission-intensive like animal-

sourced foods.

Adopt EU-wide measures within the 

exclusivity) of plant-based dishes, food 

waste and organic ratios. Offer educational 

resources for professional training of chefs.

Increase funding opportunities for R&D to 

develop healthy plant-based alternatives, 

as the sector remains largely underfunded 

compared to its animal-based counterparts.

Restrict the use of EU marketing subsidies 

from the Common Agricultural Policy to 

promote the consumption of foods which, 

according to nutritional and environmental 

science, we should be increasing the intake 

of.

Extend EU “School Schemes for fruit, 

vegetables and milk” to healthy plant-based 

alternatives to milk, catering for children 

with allergies and different preferences 

or ethical concerns and promoting more 

sustainable diets.

Boost EU investment in R&D for cultivated 

.

.

.

.

Common Agricultural Policy to reduce 

meat, seafood and additional animal-

the cost of healthy and sustainable foods, 

derived products and for other relevant 

including plant-based foods.

food technologies, to accelerate their 

study and development. These may be 

Make EU Green Public Procurement 

critical to making our food system more 

Guidelines mandatory for public food 

environmentally sustainable.

services, including those of the EU 

Institutions. The Guidelines set targets 

for the weekly availability (and often 

136

137

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET 
8. Consumer empowerment

9. Animal welfare in farms

.

.

.

.

Establish mandatory and harmonised food 

.

Promote the importance of organic and 

labelling for origin and production methods 

regenerative farming amongst the public 

.

Support a revision of the EU’s animal 

welfare legislation (Council Directive 

following scientific recommendations 

related to human and animal health 

and for processed food and meals sold 

through communication campaigns to 

98/58/EC), which is scientifically outdated, 

and the environment, and the call 

through public institutions and restaurants. 

attract more consumers and new farmers 

excludes many farmed species, and is poorly 

made by citizens in the ECI ‘End The 

Introduce a mandatory labelling system 

- financeable for example through the EU 

enforced:

Cage Age’.

for animal-derived products, including 

promotional schemes.

processed items, that classifies the rearing, 

transport and slaughter conditions. 

Establish a mandatory and harmonised 

labelling system for the nutritional value 

of food products, as a way to improve our 

health.

Establish an EU-wide label with a scoring 

system for product environmental 

sustainability, applicable to a wide range 

of categories, including food. Take into 

account carbon emissions, pesticide use, air 

pollution, and other relevant environmental 

parameters.

Revise the Textile Labelling Regulation 

to introduce information regarding 

sustainability, recyclability and circularity 

parameters to reduce textile waste, 

promote a circular economy and incentivise 

eco-designs.

.

.

.

.

Include species-specific and 

scientifically updated laws that cover 

all animals that are farmed or kept by 

humans, including aquatic animals.

Phase out long-distance animal 

transport to non-EU countries and add 

strict limits within the EU, following 

species-specific and science-based 

minimum standards; transition to 

the transport of meat/carcasses and 

genetic material; promote local and 

mobile slaughterhouse; and establish 

a strict and transparent monitoring 

and reporting system to ensure that 

violations are effectively identified, 

prevented and sanctioned.

Phase out fur production with a 

financial incentive and prohibit imports 

of fur products from third countries, 

following scientific concerns with 

human health, animal welfare and 

the environment, and also the call 

of citizens in the European Citizens’ 

.

.

.

.

Outlaw the shredding and gassing 

of male chicks, which are routinely 

performed due to their unprofitability 

in the meat and egg industries, 

transitioning to technologies that 

identify the sex before hatching. In-

ovo sexing is already being rolled out 

in some Member-states.

Address the widespread non-

compliance with legislation that 

prohibits routine pig tail docking 

(Council Directive 2008/120/EC), 

as it is still routinely performed in 

most member-states 15 years after 

the directive came into force, by 

sanctioning non-compliant Member-

states, and outlaw painful mutilations 

without pain-killers.

Outlaw rearing fast-growing breeds 

that inflict suffering and health issues 

on animals to increase profitability.

Impose compulsory video surveillance 

Initiative (ECI) ‘Fur Free Europe’.

in slaughterhouses to contribute to 

better enforcement of animal welfare 

Phase-out individual caging in farming 

laws (already mandatory in Spain).

with the support of funds and policies 

from the Common Agricultural Policy, 

138

139

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET10. General animal 
welfare

11. Antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR)

.

.

.

Outlaw the reproduction and use of wild 

.

Increase the funding for research into 

animals for entertainment, including the 

alternatives to animal testing. Establish 

use in circuses, bullfights and events of 

a roadmap with clear goals to reduce, 

similar nature, aquariums/dolphinaria and 

refine and replace (RRR) animal testing, 

zoos, supporting a transition period for 

and enhance institutional cooperation 

establishments to adapt their business 

to exchange knowledge and accelerate 

and to pair the wild animals used for 

progress. The EU needs to step up to reach 

entertainment with sanctuaries.

its commitments to RRR regarding the use 

Address illegal pet trade in the EU and 

10 million animals are still tested every year. 

of animals in scientific experiments, as over 

establish an action plan to tackle the issue. 

Implement coordinating legislation (under 

the Animal Health Law, Regulation 2016/49) 

for the licensing and registration of pet 

breeders to harmonise standards. Develop 

an EU database for the registration of pets 

(dogs, cats and ferrets), which must become 

mandatory (microchipping).

.

.

Regulate exotic pet trade through an EU-

wide positive list to protect biodiversity, 

human health, and that of other animals. 

The list would detail which animal species 

are allowed to be traded as companion 

animals.

Support the inclusion of animal welfare 

Interdict the reproduction of physically 

explicitly in the job title of the relevant 

impaired pet breeds that experience 

EU Commissioner to increase institutional 

stereotypical chronic health and welfare 

accountability and emphasise the 

issues. Some member-states are legislating 

importance of the topic in decision-making 

individually to prohibit the breeding of 

expected by European citizens.

physically impaired pet breeds (such as 

brachycephalic/flat-faced breeds), but a 

harmonised approach is preferred to secure 

cross-border animal welfare and harmonise 

the market. 

.

.

.

Develop an EU-wide mandatory and 

.

Further reduce antibiotic usage in animal 

scientifically-based preferential system 

farming, which has dropped significantly 

for antibiotic use, so that the first choice 

in the last decade, since many multi-

treatment is the most appropriate one 

resistant pathogens are still found in animal 

in all Member-states (as is already the 

products:

case for veterinary usage), following the 

‘One Health’ approach. This will limit the 

unnecessary use of antibiotics in cases 

where usage is not indicated.

Adopt regulations for reserving antibiotics 

for emergency cases as an extension of 

the current regulation that limits access 

to certain antibiotics in the veterinary 

sector (Regulation 2019/6 on veterinary 

medicines).

Expand the current R&D initiatives for new 

treatments and medical technology.

.

.

.

.

Limit mixing large numbers of 

animals from different origins (e.g. 

calf rearing). AMR is particularly 

aggravated by intensive animal 

farming since the cramped, unhealthy 

and stressful conditions in which 

animals are kept and transported 

create an environment where 

pathogens can thrive.

Support initiatives to de-intensify 

animal farming. 

Rear a more diverse portfolio of animal 

breeds to prevent the occurrence and 

spread of diseases and have a more 

resilient production system.

Implement reinforced EU-wide 

education and training programs for 

farmers regarding antimicrobial usage, 

and awareness campaigns for the 

general public about the dangers of 

AMR.

140

141

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET12. Pricing the costs

13. Transparency, monitoring 
and reporting

.

.

Ensure that the EU Emissions Trading 

System (ETS) includes land use, land use 

change, and forestry (LULUCF), with each 

member state treated as a single emitter. 

Conduct the accounting at the EU level, 

.

.

Extend the ETS system to animal farming, 

as pollution from this sector must also be 

accounted for.

.

Extend the Climate-ADAPT platform to 

.

Establish a comprehensive scoring system 

become an EU-wide harmonised real-

for monitoring ecosystem health and 

time monitoring and decision support 

resilience, indicating areas in need of 

system, as it currently only serves as a 

natural restoration. Apply it to all EU 

Extend the Industrial Emissions Directive 

knowledge base for data and best practices 

territories and make it publicly available 

while allowing each Member State to 

(IED) to all types of industrial animal 

regarding climate change mitigation and 

online through an interactive map, 

respect their circumstances and pursue 

farming, applying to holdings that contain 

adaptation. Implement an early warning 

containing regularly updated data. Link 

their strategy.

the number of animals deemed relevant by 

system for extreme weather events and 

this scoring system to the Climate-ADAPT 

science.

interface with the European Emergency 

platform.

Tax agricultural emissions from animal 

husbandry and soil use at the source since 

they are local and fragmented. Cover 

other non-sector-specific emissions in 

the agricultural sector (such as electricity 

and tractor fuels) under the ETS, mid- or 

upstream.

Response Coordination Centre and national 

governments for orchestrating public aid.

142

143

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANETHow we will pursue this act in 
the European Parliament 

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the Act

The Healthy Ecosystems Act touches legally 

2008/50/EC on Ambient Air Quality and 

on the Directives and Regulations falling 

Cleaner Air for Europe. Moreover, the Industrial 

under the European Green Deal, Air Quality 

Emissions Directive (2010/75/EU) needs to 

and Pollution Control, Common Agricultural 

call more for switching away from exploitative 

The total costs of this Act, which consist of 

the implementation costs and the annual 

costs for five years, is € 1.015.000.000.  The 

implementation costs are € 115.000.000 and 

Policy (CAP), Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), 

activities and unsustainable consumptions, and 

the annual costs are € 180.000.000.

Circular Economy, and One Health Approach 

lastly by promoting the protection of natural 

initiatives. The Act, notably comprised of 13 

resources, reversing species loss, mitigating 

Moonshot policies, which advocate for air 

climate change, and fostering resilient and 

quality, reduction of pollution, sustainable 

sustainable communities that enhance human, 

agriculture, waste management, and the 

animal, and environmental health, benefitting 

interconnectedness of human, animal, 

current and future generations and the entire 

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Program are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

and environmental health, necessitates 

ecosystem. Waste Framework Directive 

campaigns.

modifications within the purview of the 

(2008/98/EC) and Packaging and Packaging 

following legislative instruments Directive 

Waste Directive (94/62/EC) are requested to 

2008/50/EC on Ambient Air Quality and Cleaner 

require more attention to reversing species 

Air for Europe, Industrial Emissions Directive 

loss and promoting sustainable communities 

(2010/75/EU), Waste Framework Directive 

by reducing the negative environmental 

(2008/98/EC), Packaging and Packaging Waste 

impact of waste generation and disposal. 

Examples of annual costs are salaries and 

benefits, administrative costs, infrastructure 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

running of the proposed policies.

Directive (94/62/EC). 

The Act supports a revamp of the current 

animal welfare legislation, amongst which the 

The total costs of the complete Moonshot 

Program are mentioned separately from the 

By calling for particular focus on the 

Council Directive 98/58/EC on the protection 

total income.

interconnected environmental challenges by 

of animals. Furthermore, the Act calls for 

recognising that tackling climate change is 

alignment between the nature restoration law 

inseparable from preserving vital ecosystems 

and environmental science. 

(i.e., carbon sinks, food supply), the Moonshot 

policies push for amendments in the Articles 

tackling these topics falling under the Directive 

144

145

Volt EuropeVolt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALSLIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANETEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS

Costs and Income of the 
proposals included in the 
Moonshot Programme

The total costs of the Moonshot Programme, 

which consist of the implementation costs 

Proposed taxation of carbon emissions 
€ 450.000.000.000

and the annual costs for five years, is 

€ 5.452.156.000.000.  The implementation costs 

are € 2.092.589.000.000 and the annual costs 

Proposed taxation of digital services   
€ 625.000.000.000

are € 671.913.400.000.

Proposed taxation of unsustainable 

Examples of implementation costs in the 

Moonshot Programme are the policy and legal 

framework development, the capacity building 

consumption 
€ 125.000.000.000

and training of (new) staff, the building of IT 

or physical infrastructure, or public awareness 

Proposed taxation of wealth 
€ 100.000.000.000

campaigns.

Examples of annual costs in the Moonshot 

Programme are salaries and benefits, 

Proposed taxation of kerosine and fossil fuels 
€ 2.426.407.856.259

administrative costs, infrastructure 

It should be noted that the income from the 

maintenance, or the costs associated with the 

taxation of carbon emissions and the taxation 

running of the proposed policies.

of kerosine and fossil fuels is expected to 

The total income generated by 

focussing on lowering the use of fossil fuels. 

implementing the Moonshot Programme is 

Even without these incomes, the proposals 

€ 5.452.156.141.973. This creates a total positive 

remain financially sustainable, since the 

decrease over time, due to the proposals 

Electoral Moonshot Programme

2024-29 Policy Acts

Contributors:

Heads of Policy at Volt Europa
Claudio Lanza

Inês Bravo Figueiredo

Leads of the College of Policy Shapers
Polen Turkmen

result of € 141.973 over five years. The income 

implementation costs are not recurring costs.

Noah von Heimendahl

is generated over five years by the following 

proposals:

Increasing the EU budget 
€ 1.534.714.285.714

Increasing the Horizon Europe budget 
€ 191.034.000.000

Policy Shapers
Janko Heineken, Sarah Tegas, Kate Fistric, 

Charlotte Barsky, Ronan Kerleo, Stefanos 

Tyros, Teun Janssen, Clara Panella Gómez, 

Janne Gerrits, Christiaan Meinsma, Sascha 

Mann, Carlo Gaillard, Theo Doreleijers, 

Michael Eichelbeck, Diana Andrei, Rhia 

Legislative Office
Mathea Essinger, Diana Andrei, Kremena 

Ganeva, Lara Steer

Budget Office
Benjamin F.A.C. Ector

Editorial Review
Luís Almeida Fernandes

Member’s Assembly
Maartje Huernink

Volt Europe

146

147

Lopes,  Philipp Decking, Jelmer van der Ende, 

Veronika Vancheri, Bram Vandeninden, 

Brieuc Hallouët, Anica Nerlich

Executive Assistants
Alessia Utano

Mrinalini Fauzdar

Volt EuropeEU ELECTORAL MOONSHOT PROGRAMME POLICY PROPOSALS LIVEABLE PLANET 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
